CHAPTER I The vision of Isaiah, the son of Amoz, which
concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah kings of Judah.
Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth, for the Lord hath spoken. I have nourished and brought
up children, and they have rebelled against me. The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's
crib, but Israel doth not know. My people doth not consider. Ah, sinful nation, a people laden with
iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters. They have forsaken the Lord,
they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger. They are gone away backward.
Why should ye be stricken any more? Ye will revolt more and more. The whole head is sick,
and the whole heart faint. From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in
it but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores. They have not been closed, neither bound up,
neither mollified with ointment. Your country is desolate, your cities are burned with fire,
your land strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate as overthrown by strangers.
And the daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers,
as a besieged city. Except the Lord of Host had left unto us a very small remnant,
we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah.
Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom, give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of
Gomorrah. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me, saith the Lord?
I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts, and I delight not in the blood
of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats. When ye come to appear before me, who hath required
this at your hand to tread my cords? Bring no more vain oblations. Incense is an abomination unto me.
The new moons and Sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with. It is iniquity,
even the solemn meeting. Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth.
They are a trouble unto me. I am weary to bear them. And when ye spread forth your hands,
I will hide mine eyes from you. Yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear. Your hands are full
of blood. Wash you. Make you clean. Put away the evil of your doings, from before mine eyes cease
to do evil. Learn to do well. Seek judgment. Relieve the oppressed. Judge the fatherless.
Plead for the widow. Come now, let us reason together, saith the Lord. Though your sins be
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. Though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.
If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land. But if ye refuse and rebel,
ye shall be devoured with the sword, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.
How is the faithful city becoming harlot? It was full of judgment. Righteousness lodged in it.
But now murderers. Thy silver is become dross. Thy wine mixed with water. Thy princes are
rebellious and companions of thieves. Everyone loveth gifts and followeth after rewards. They judge
not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them. Therefore saith the Lord,
the Lord of hosts, the mighty one of Israel, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me
of mine enemies. And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all
thy men. And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning.
Afterward thou shalt be called the city of righteousness, the faithful city. Zion shall
be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness. And the destruction of the transgressors
and of the sinners shall be together. And they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed.
For they shall be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for the
gardens that ye have chosen. For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden that
hath no water. And the strong shall be as toe, and the maker of it as a spark. And they shall
both burn together, and none shall quench them. Chapter 2. The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz
saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain
of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above
the hills, and all the nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go, and say, Come ye,
and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob. And he will teach
us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people.
And they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks. Nations shall
not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. O house of Jacob, come ye,
let us walk in the light of the Lord. Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob,
because they be replenished from the east, and are soothsayers like the Philistines,
and they please themselves in the children of strangers. Their land also is full of silver and
gold, neither is there any end of their treasures. Their land is also full of horses, neither is there
any end of their chariots. Their land is also full of idols. They worship the work of their own hands,
that which their own fingers have made. And the mean man boweth down, and the great man
humbleth himself. Therefore forgive them not. Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust,
for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty. The lofty looks of man shall be humbled,
and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.
For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty,
and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low, and upon all the cedars of Lebanon
that are high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Basian, and upon all the high mountains,
and upon all the hills that are lifted up, and upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall,
and upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures.
And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low,
and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. And the idols he shall utterly abolish,
and they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth,
for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the
earth. In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made
each one for himself to worship, to the moles, and to the bats, to go into the clefts of the rocks,
and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty,
when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils,
for wherein is he to be accounted of? Chapter 3 For behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts,
doth take away from Jerusalem, and from Judah, the stay, and the staff, the whole stay of bread,
and the whole stay of water, the mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet,
and the prudent, and the ancient, the captain of fifty, and the honorable man, and the counselor,
and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent orator, and I will give children to be their princes,
and babes shall rule over them, and the people shall be oppressed every one by another,
and every one by his neighbor, the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient,
and the base against the honorable. When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of
his father, saying, Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand.
In that day shall he swear, saying, I will not be in healer, for in my house is neither bread,
nor clothing, make me not a ruler of the people. For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah has fallen,
because their tongue and their doings are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory.
The show of their countenance doth witness against them, and they declare their sin as
sodom they hided not. Woe unto their soul, for they have rewarded evil unto themselves.
Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him, for they shall eat the fruit of their
doings. Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given
him. As for my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule over them. O my people,
they which lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths. The Lord standeth
up to plead, and standeth to judge the people. The Lord will enter into judgment with the
ancients of his people, and the princes thereof, for ye have eaten up the vineyard. The spoil of
the poor is in your houses. What mean ye, that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces
of the poor, saith the Lord God of hosts? Moreover, the Lord saith, because the daughters of Zion are
haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go,
and making a tinkling with their feet. Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the
head of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret paths. In that day, the Lord
will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet, and their calls,
and their round tires like the moon, the chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers,
the bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the earrings,
the rings, and the nose jewels, the changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples,
and the crisping pins, the glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the veils.
And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there shall be stink,
and instead of a girdle a rent, and instead of well-set hair baldness, and instead of a
stomacher a girding of sackcloth, and burning instead of beauty. Thy men shall fall by the sword,
and thy mighty in the war, and her gates shall lament and mourn,
and she being desolate shall sit upon the ground.
4.
And in that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, We will eat our own bread,
and wear our own apparel. Only let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach.
And in that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth
shall be excellent and comely for them that are escaped of Israel. And it shall come to pass,
that he that is left in Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy,
even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem. When the Lord shall have washed away
the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst
thereof, by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning. And the Lord will create upon
every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon her assemblies a cloud and smoke by day, and the
glory shall be a defense. And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the
heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from the storm and from rain. 5.
Now will I sing to my well-beloved a song of my beloved touching his vineyard. My well-beloved
hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill. And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof,
and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also made a wine
press therein. And he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.
And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you,
betwixt me and my vineyard, what could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not done in
it? Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes?
And now go, too, I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard. I will take away the hedge thereof,
and it shall be eaten up, and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down.
And I will lay it waste. It shall not be pruned nor digged, but there shall come up briars and
thorns. I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. For the vineyard of the
Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant. And he looked for
judgment but behold oppression, for righteousness but behold a cry. Woe unto them that join house
to house, that lay field to field, till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the
midst of the earth. In mine ears, said the Lord of hosts, of a truth many houses shall be desolate,
even great and fair without inhabitant. Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath,
and the seed of an homer shall yield an ephah. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning,
that they may follow strong drink, that continue until night, till wine inflame them. And the harp,
and the vial, the tabret, and pipe, and wine are in their feasts. But they regard not the work of
the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands. Therefore my people are gone into captivity,
because they have no knowledge, and their honorable men are famished, and their multitude dried up
with thirst. Therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without measure,
and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth shall descend into it.
And the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be humbled,
and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled. But the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment,
and God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness. Then shall the lambs feed
after their manor, and the waste places of the fat ones shall strangers eat. Woe unto them that
draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart-rope, that say, Let him make speed
and hasten his work that we may see it, and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh
and come that we may know it. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness
for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Woe unto them
that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight. Woe unto them that are mighty
to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink, which justify the wicked for reward,
and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him. Therefore, as the fire devoureth the
stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their blossom
shall go up as dust, because they have cast away the law of the Lord of hosts, and despised the
word of the Holy One of Israel. Therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled against his people,
and he hath stretched forth his hand against them, and hath smitten them, and the hills did tremble,
and their carcasses were torn in the midst of the streets. For all this his anger is not turned away,
but his hand is stretched out still, and he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far,
and will hiss unto them from the end of the earth, and behold, they shall come with speed swiftly.
None shall be weary nor stumble among them, none shall slumber nor sleep, neither shall the girdle
of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken, whose arrows are sharp,
and all their bows bent, their horses' hooves shall be counted like flint, and their wheels
like a whirlwind. Their roaring shall be like a lion, they shall roar like young lions, yea,
they shall roar and lay hold of the prey, and shall carry it away safe, and none shall deliver it.
And in that day they shall roar against them like the roaring of the sea, and if one look unto the
land, behold, darkness and sorrow, and the light is darkened in the heavens thereof.
Chapter 6 In the year that King Uzziah died I saw also the Lord, sitting upon a throne high
and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. Above it stood the seraphims,
each one had six wings, with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet,
and with twain he did fly. And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord
of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory. And the posts of the door moved at the voice of
him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke. Then said I, Woe is me, for I am undone,
because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips,
for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. Then flew one of the seraphims unto me,
having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar.
And he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken
away, and thy sin purged. Also I heard the voice of the Lord saying, Whom shall I send,
and who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I, send me. And he said, Go, and tell this people,
hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of
people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed.
Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant,
and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate, and the Lord have removed
men far away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land. But yet in it shall be a
tenth, and it shall return, and shall be eaten, as a teal tree, and as an oak, whose substance
is in them. When they cast their leaves, so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.
THIS IS A LIBROVOX RECORDING
ALL LIBROVOX RECORDINGS ARE IN THE PUBLIC DOMAIN
FOR MORE INFORMATION OR TO VOLUNTEER
PLEASE VISIT LIBROVOX DOT ORG
THE BOOK OF ISAIAH
King James Version, Chapter 7
And it came to pass, in the days of Ahaz,
the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah,
king of Judah, that Rezin,
the king of Syria, and Pekah,
the son of Ramaliah, king of Israel,
went up toward Jerusalem to war against it,
but could not prevail against it.
And it was told the house of David, saying,
Syria is confederate with Ephraim,
and his heart was moved,
and the heart of his people,
as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind.
Then said the Lord unto Isaiah,
Go forth now to meet Ahaz,
thou, and Shear-deshab thy son.
At the end of the conduit of the upper pool,
in the highway of the fuller's field.
And say unto him,
Take heed, and be quiet,
fear not neither be faint-hearted,
for the two tales of these smoking-fire brands,
for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria,
and of the son of Ramaliah.
Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Ramaliah,
have taken evil counsel against thee,
saying, Let us go up against Judah and vex it,
and let us make a breach therein for us,
and set a king in the midst of it,
even the son of Tabeel.
Thus saith the Lord God,
It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass,
for the head of Syria is Damascus,
and the head of Damascus is Rezin,
and within three score and five years shall Ephraim be broken,
that it be not a people.
And the head of Ephraim is Samaria,
and the head of Samaria is Ramaliah's son.
If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established.
Moreover, the Lord spake again unto Ahaz, saying,
Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God,
ask it either in the depth or in the height above.
But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord.
And he said, Hear ye now, O house of David,
is it a small thing for you to weary men,
but will ye weary my God also?
Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign,
behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son,
and shall call his name Immanuel.
Butter and honey shall he eat,
that he may know to refuse the evil and choose the good.
For before the child shall know to refuse the evil and choose the good,
the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings.
The Lord shall bring upon thee and upon thy people
and upon thy father's house days that have not come,
from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah, even the king of Assyria.
And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall hiss
for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt,
and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria.
And they shall come and shall rest, all of them,
in the desolate valleys and in the holes of the rocks,
and upon all thorns and upon all bushes.
In the same day shall the Lord save with a razor that is hired,
namely, by them beyond the river, by the king of Assyria,
the head and the hair of the feet.
And it shall also consume the beard, and it shall come to pass in that day
that a man shall nourish a young cow and two sheep.
And it shall come to pass for the abundance of milk that they shall give,
he shall eat butter.
For butter and honey shall everyone eat that is left in the land.
And it shall come to pass in that day that every place shall be
where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings.
It shall even be for briars and thorns.
With arrows and with bows shall men come thither,
because all the land shall become briars and thorns.
And on all the hills that shall be digged with the matak,
there shall not come neither the fear of briars and thorns,
but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen
and for the treading of lesser cattle.
Chapter 8
Moreover, the Lord said unto me,
Take thee a great roll, and write it in with a man's pen,
concerning Maher shal al-Hashbaz.
And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record Uriah the priest,
and Zechariah the son of Jebur Recahiah.
And I went unto the prophetess, and she conceived, and bare a son.
Then said the Lord to me,
Call his name, Maher shal al-Hashbaz.
For before the child shall have knowledge to cry,
my father and my mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria,
shall be taken away before the king of Assyria.
The Lord spake also unto me again, saying,
For as much as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloh that go softly,
and rejoice and resin in Remaliah's son,
now therefore behold the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of the river,
strong and many, even the king of Assyria and all his glory,
and he shall come up over all his channels, and go over all his banks.
And he shall pass through Judah, he shall overflow and go over,
he shall reach even to the neck, and the stretching out of his wings,
shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel.
Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces,
and give ear, all ye of far countries, gird yourselves,
and ye shall be broken in pieces.
Gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces.
Take counsel together, and it shall come to naught.
Speak the word, and it shall not stand, for God is with us.
For the Lord spake thus to me with a strong hand,
and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this people,
say ye not a confederacy to all them to whom this people shall say a confederacy.
Neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid.
Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.
And he shall be for a sanctuary, but for a stone of stumbling,
and for a rock of offense to both the houses of Israel,
for a djinn, and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken.
Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples,
and I will wait upon the Lord that hideth his face from the house of Jacob,
and I will look for him.
Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given me
are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of Hosts which dwelleth in Mount Zion.
And when they shall say unto you, seek unto them that have familiar spirits,
and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter,
should not a people seek unto their God for the living to the dead,
to the law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them.
And they shall pass through it, hardly bested and hungry,
and it shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry,
they shall fret themselves, and curse their king and their God,
and look upward, and they shall look onto the earth,
and behold, trouble and darkness, demnis of anguish,
and they shall be driven to darkness.
Nevertheless, the demnis shall not be such as was in her vexation,
when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulon,
and the land of Nephtali,
and afterward did more grievously afflict her,
by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan in Galilee of the nations.
The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light.
They that dwell in the land of the shadow of death,
upon them hath the light shined.
Thou hast multiplied the nation, and not increased the joy.
They joy before thee according to the joy in harvest,
and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil.
For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden,
and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor,
as in the day of Midian.
For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise,
and garments rolled in blood.
But this shall be with burning and fuel of fire,
for unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given,
and the government shall be upon his shoulder,
and his name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor, the Mighty God,
the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.
Of the increase of his government and peace,
there shall be no end upon the throne of David,
and upon his kingdom to order it,
and to establish it with judgment and with justice,
from henceforth even forever.
The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this.
The Lord sent his word into Jacob,
and it hath lighted upon Israel,
and all the people shall know, even Ephraim,
and the inhabitant of Samaria,
that say in the pride and stoutness of heart,
the bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones,
the sycamores are cut down, but we will change them into cedars.
Therefore, the Lord shall set up the adversaries of resin against him,
and join his enemies together.
The Syrians before, and the Philistines behind,
and they shall devour Israel with open mouth.
For all this, his anger is not turned away,
but his hand is stretched out still.
For the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them,
neither do they seek the Lord of hosts.
Therefore, the Lord will cut off from Israel,
head and tail, branch and rush in one day.
The ancient and honorable, he is the head,
and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail.
For the leaders of this people cause them to err,
and they that are led of them are destroyed.
Therefore, the Lord shall have no joy in their young men,
neither shall have mercy on their fatherless and widows.
For everyone is in hypocrite and in evildoer,
and every mouth speaketh folly.
For all this, his anger is not turned away,
but his hand is stretched out still.
For wickedness burneth as the fire,
it shall devour the briars and thorns,
and shall kindle in the thickets of the forest,
and they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke.
Through the wrath of the Lord of hosts is the land darkened,
and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire.
No man shall spare his brother,
and he shall snatch on the right hand and be hungry,
and he shall eat on the left hand,
and they shall not be satisfied.
They shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm.
Manasseh, Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh,
and they together shall be against Judah.
For all this, his anger is not turned away,
but his hand is stretched out still.
CHAPTERS 10-12 OF ISAIAH
The Book of Isaiah, King James Version, Chapter 10.
Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees,
and that right grievousness which they have prescribed,
to turn aside the needy from judgment,
and to take away the right from the poor of my people,
that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless.
And what will ye do in the day of visitation,
and in the desolation which shall come from far?
To whom will ye flee for help?
And where will ye leave your glory?
Without me they shall bow down under the prisoners,
and they shall fall under the slain.
For all this his anger is not turned away,
but his hand is stretched out still.
O Assyrian, the rod of my anger,
and the staff in their hand of mine indignation,
I will send him against an hypocritical nation,
and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge,
to take the spoil and to take the prey,
and to tread them down like the mire of the streets.
Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so,
but it is in his heart to destroy, and cut off nations, not a few.
For he sayeth, Are not my princes altogether kings?
Is not Calno as Kar-Kamish?
Is not Hamath as Arpad?
Is not Samaria as Damascus?
As my hand hath found the kingdoms of the idols,
and whose graven images do excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria,
shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols,
so do to Jerusalem and her idols?
Wherefore it shall come to pass,
that when the Lord hath performed his whole work upon Mount Zion,
and on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart
of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks.
For he sayeth, By the strength of my hand I have done it,
and by my wisdom.
For I am prudent, and I have removed the bonds of the people,
and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants
like a valiant man.
And my hand hath found, as a nest of riches of the people,
and as one gathereth eggs that are left, have I gathered all the earth.
And there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped.
Shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith,
or shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it,
as if the rod should shake itself against them that lift it up,
or as if the staff should lift up itself as if it were no wood?
Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of hosts, send among his fat ones leanness,
and under his glory he shall kindle a burning, like the burning of a fire.
And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his holy one for a flame.
And it shall burn and devour his thorns and his briars in one day,
and shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field,
both soul and body, and they shall be as when a standard bearer fainteth.
And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a child may write them.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of Israel,
and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again stay upon him
that smote them, but shall stay upon the Lord, the holy one of Israel, in truth.
The remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God.
For thou, thy people Israel, be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall return.
The consumption decreed shall overflow with righteousness.
For the Lord God of hosts shall make a consumption even determined in the midst of all the land.
Therefore, thus saith the Lord God of hosts, O my people that dwellest in Zion,
be not afraid of the Assyrian. He shall smite thee with a rod,
and shall lift up his staff against thee after the manner of Egypt.
For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction.
And the Lord of hosts shall stir up a scourge for him,
according to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb.
And his rod was upon the sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that his burden shall be taken away from off thy shoulder,
and his yoke from off thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing.
He is come to Ayathe. He is passed to Megrun.
At Micmash, he hath laid up his carriages. They are gone over the passage.
They have taken up their lodging and gibba. Ramah is afraid.
Kabiah of Saul is fled. Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gollum.
Cause it to be heard unto Laish, O poor Anathoth.
Madmenna is removed. The inhabitants of Gibbim gather themselves to flee.
As yet shall he remain at Nob that day. He shall shake his hand against the mount
of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem. Behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts shall lop
the bough with terror, and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and the hearty shall be
humbled. And he shall cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and Lebanon shall be a mighty one.
Chapter 11. And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out
of his roots. And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding,
the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord,
and shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord. And he shall not judge
after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears, but with righteousness
shall he judge the poor and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth. And he shall smite the
earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.
And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.
The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid and the calf
and the lion and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear
shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together, and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.
And the suckling child shall play on the hole, and the asp and the weaned child shall put his hand on
to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left from Assyria and from Egypt
and from Pathros and from Cush and from Elam and from Shinar and from Hamath
and from the islands of the sea. And he shall set up an ensign for the nations,
and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah
from the four corners of the earth. The envy also of Ephraim shall depart,
and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off. Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah
shall not vex Ephraim. But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines toward the west.
They shall spoil them of the east together. They shall lay their hands upon Edom and Moab
and the children of Ammon shall obey them, and the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue
of the Egyptian sea. And with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river,
and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over Dry Shad. And there shall be
an highway for the remnant of his people, which shall be left from Assyria, like as it was to
Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt. Chapter 12. And in that day thou
shalt say, O Lord, I will praise thee. Though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away,
and thou comfortest me. Behold, God is my salvation. I will trust and not be afraid,
for the Lord Jehovah is my strength and my song. He also is become my salvation. Therefore, with
joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation, and in that day shall ye praise the
Lord. Call upon his name. Declare his doings among the people. Make mention that his name is exalted.
Sing unto the Lord, for he hath done excellent things. This is known in all the earth. Cry out
and shout thou, inhabitant of Zion, for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.
13. The burden of Babylon which Isaiah the son of Amos did see. Lift ye up a banner upon
the high mountain, exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand that they may go into the gates
of the nobles. I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones for my
anger, even them that rejoice in my highness. The noise of a multitude in the mountains,
like as of a great people, a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms and nations gathered together,
the Lord of hosts must rid the host of the battle. They come from a far country,
from the end of heaven, even the Lord and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole
land. How ye for the day of the Lord is at hand, it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty.
Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man's heart shall melt, and they shall be afraid,
pains and sorrows shall take hold of them, they shall be in pain as a woman that travelleth,
they shall be amazed one at another, their faces shall be as flames. Behold the day of the Lord
cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the lame desolate, he shall destroy the
sinners thereof out of it. For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not
give their light, the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her
light to shine. And I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity,
and I will cause the arrogance of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the
terrible. I will make a man more precious than fine gold, even a man than the golden wedge of
ophir. Therefore I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place,
in the wrath of the Lord of hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger. And it shall be as the
chaste roe, and as a sheep that no man taketh up, they shall every man turn to his own people,
and flee every one into his own land. Every one that is found shall be thrust through,
and every one that is joined unto them shall fall by the sword. Their children also shall be dashed
to pieces before their eyes. Their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished. Behold,
I will stir up the meads against them, which shall not regard silver, and as for gold they
shall not delight in it. Their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces. They shall have
no pity on the fruit of the womb. Their eyes shall not spare children. And Babylon, the glory of
kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees, excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.
It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation,
neither shall the Arabian pitch-tent there, neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.
But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there, and their houses shall be full of doe-full
creatures, and owls shall dwell there, and satires shall dance there. And the wild beasts
of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces,
and her time is near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged.
Chapter 14 For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel,
and set them in their own land, and the strangers shall be joined with them,
and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob. And the people shall take them, and bring them
to their place, and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord for servants
and handmaids, and they shall take them captives, whose captives they were, and they shall rule over
their oppressors. And it shall come to pass in the day that the Lord shall give them rest from thy
sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve,
that thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say,
How hath the oppressor ceased, the Golan city ceased? The Lord hath broken the staff of the
wicked, and the scepter of the rulers. He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke,
he that ruled the nations in anger is persecuted, and none hindereth. The whole earth is at rest,
and is quiet. They break forth into singing. Yea, the fir trees rejoice at thee, and the
cedars of Lebanon, saying, Since thou art laid down, no feller has come up against us.
Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming. It stirreth up the dead for thee,
even all the chief ones of the earth. It hath raised up from their thrones all the kings of
the nations. All they shall speak, and say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou
become like unto us? Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy vials, the worm
is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer,
son of the morning? How art thou cut down to the ground, which doth weaken the nations? For thou
hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars
of God, I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north. I will
ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like the Most High. Yet thou shalt be brought down
to hell, to the sides of the pit. They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider
thee same. Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that to shake kingdoms, that made the
world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof, that opened not the house of his prisoners?
All the kings of the nations, even all of them, lie in glory, every one in his own house. But thou
art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, and as the raiment of those that are slain,
thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit, as a carcass trodden under feet.
Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, and slain
thy people. The seed of evildoers shall never be renowned. Prepare slaughter for his children,
for the iniquity of their fathers, that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the face
of the world with cities. For I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of hosts, and cut off
from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith the Lord. I will also make it a
possession for the bitter and pools of water, and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction,
saith the Lord of hosts. The Lord of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely, as I have thought, so shall
come to pass, and as I have purposed, so shall it stand, that I will break the Assyrian in my land,
and upon my mountains tread him under foot, then shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden
depart from off their shoulders. This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth,
and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations. For the Lord of hosts hath purposed,
who shall disannul it, and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back? In the year that
King Ahaz died was this burden. Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him that
smote thee is broken, for out of the serpent's root shall come forth a cockatrice, and his fruit
shall be a fiery flying serpent. And the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie
down in safety, and I will kill thy root with famine, and he shall slay thy remnant. How,
O gate, cry, O city, thou whole Palestina art dissolved, for there shall come from the north
a smoke, and none shall be alone in his appointed times. What shall one then answer the messengers
of the nation, that the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it?
Chapter 15. The burden of Moab. Because in the night, R of Moab is laid waste, and brought to
silence. Because in the night, Kur of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence. He is gone up to
Bajith, and to dive on, the high places to weep. Moab shall howl over Nebo, and over Mediba. On all
our heads shall be baldness, and every beard cut off. In their streets they shall gird themselves
with sackcloth. On the tops of their houses, and in their streets, every one shall howl, weeping
abundantly. And Heshbon shall cry, and Elieli. Their voice shall be heard, even unto Jehaz.
Therefore the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out. His life shall be grievous unto him. My heart
shall cry out for Moab. His fugitives shall flee unto Zohar, an heifer of three years old. For by
the mounting up of Luhith, with weeping shall they go it up. For in the way of Horanaim they
shall raise up a cry of destruction. For the waters of Nimrum shall be desolate. For the
hay is withered away, and the grass faileth. There is no green thing. Therefore the abundance
they have gotten, and that which they have laid up, shall they carry away to the brook of the
willows. For the cry has gone round about the borders of Moab, and the howling thereof unto
Eglem, and the howling thereof unto Birlim. For the waters of Daimon shall be full of blood. For I
will bring more upon Daimon, lions upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the remnant of the land.
CHAPTERS XVI-XVIII OF ISAIAH
The Book of Isaiah, King James Version
Chapter 16
Senyi, the lamb, to the ruler of the land, from Sila to the wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of Zion. For it shall be that as a wandering bird cast out of the nest, so the daughters of Moab shall be at the fords of Arnon.
Take counsel. Execute judgment. Make thy shadow as the night in the midst of the noonday. Hide the outcast. Be ray, not him that wandereth.
Let mine outcast dwell with thee, Moab. Be thou a covert to them from the face of the spoiler. For the extortioner is at an end. The spoiler ceaseth. The oppressors are consumed out of the land.
And in mercy shall the throne be established, and he shall sit upon it in truth, in the tabernacle of David judging, and seeking judgment, and hasting righteousness. We have heard of the pride of Moab. He is very proud even of his haughtiness, and his pride and his wrath, but his lies shall not be so.
Therefore shall Moab howl for Moab. Everyone shall howl for the foundations of Kir-her-es-eth. Shall ye mourn? Surely they are stricken.
For the fields of Heshbon languish, and the vine of Sibmah. The lords of the heathen have broken down the principal plants thereof. They are come even to Jazer. They wandered through the wilderness. Her branches are stretched out. They are gone over the sea.
Therefore I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer, the vine of Sibmah. I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon and Iliela, for the shouting of thy summer fruits, and for thy harvest is fallen.
And gladness is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field, and in the vineyards there shall be no singing, neither shall there be shouting. The treaders shall tread out no wine in their presses. I have made their vintage shouting to cease.
Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an arp for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kir-her-esh. And it shall come to pass when it is seen that Moab is weary, on the high place that he shall come to his sanctuary to pray, but he shall not prevail.
This is the word that the Lord hath spoken concerning Moab since that time. But now the Lord hath spoken, saying, Within three years, as the years of inhiling and the glory of Moab shall be condemned, with all that great multitude and the remnant shall be very small and feeble.
The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from being a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap. The cities of Aurora are forsaken. They shall be for flocks which shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid.
The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant of Syria, they shall be as the glory of the children of Israel, saith the Lord of hosts.
And in that day it shall come to pass, that the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean. And it shall be as when the harvest man gathereth the corn, and reapeth the ears with his arm, and it shall be as he that gathereth ears in the valley of Rephaim.
Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as the shaking of an olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof, saith the Lord God of Israel.
At that day shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the Holy One of Israel. And he shall not look to the altars, the work of his hands, neither shall respect that which his fingers have made, either the grooves or the images.
In that day shall his strong cities be as a forsaken bough, and an uppermost branch which they left because of the children of Israel, and there shall be desolation.
Because thou hast forgotten the Lord of thy salvation, and hast not been mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore shalt thou plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it with strange slips.
In the day shalt thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning shalt thou make thy seed to flourish. But the harvest shall be a heap in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow.
Woe to the multitude of many people which make a noise like the noise of the seas, and to the rushing of nations that make a rushing like the rushing of mighty waters.
The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters, but God shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the shape of the mountains before the wind, and like a rolling thing before the whirlwind.
And behold, at even tide trouble, and before the morning he is not. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us.
Woe to the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, that sendeth ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels of bull rushes upon the waters, saying,
Go ye swift messengers, to a nation scattered and peeled, to a people terrible from their beginning hitherto, a nation meted out and trodden down, whose land the rivers have spoiled.
All ye inhabitants of the world and dwellers on the earth, see ye when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains, and when he bloweth the trumpet, hear ye.
For so the Lord said unto me, I will take my rest, and I will consider in my dwelling place a clear heat upon herbs, and like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.
For afore the harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sour grape is ripening in the flower, he shall both cut off the sprigs with pruning hooks, and take away and cut down the branches.
They shall be left together unto the fowls of the mountains, and to the beasts of the earth, and the fowls shall summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them.
In that time shall the present be brought unto the Lord of hosts, of a people scattered and peeled, and from a people terrible from their beginning hitherto, a nation meted out and trodden underfoot, whose land the rivers have spoiled.
To the place of the name of the Lord of hosts, the Mount of Zion.
CHAPTER XIX.
THE BURDEN OF EGYPT
Behold, the LORD writeth upon a swift cloud, and shall come into Egypt, and the idols
of Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst
of it.
And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, and they shall fight every one against his
brother, and every one against his neighbor, city against city, and kingdom against kingdom.
And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof, and I will destroy the council
thereof, and they shall seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to them that have
familiar spirits, and to the wizards.
And the Egyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruel LORD, and a fierce king shall
rule over them, said the LORD, the LORD of hosts.
And the waters shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be wasted and dried up.
And they shall turn the rivers far away, and the brooks of defense shall be emptied and
dried up.
The reeds and flags shall wither.
The paper reeds by the brooks, by the mouth of the brooks, and everything sewn by the
brooks, shall wither, be driven away, and be no more.
The fishers also shall mourn, and all they that cast ankle into the brooks shall lament,
and they that spread nets upon the waters shall languish.
Moreover, they that work in fine flax, and they that weave networks, shall be confounded,
and they shall be broken in the purposes thereof, all that make sluices and ponds for fish.
Surely the princes of Zoan are fools.
The counsel of the wise counselors of Pharaoh is become brutish.
How say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings.
Where are they?
Where are thy wise men?
And let them tell thee now, and let them know what the Lord of hosts hath purposed upon
Egypt.
The princes of Zoan are become fools.
The princes of Noph are deceived.
They have also seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay of the tribes thereof.
The Lord hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof, and they have caused Egypt
to err in every work thereof, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit.
Neither shall there be any work for Egypt, which the head or tail, branch or rush may
do.
In that day shall Egypt be like unto women, and it shall be afraid and feared because
of the shaking of the hand of the Lord of hosts, which he shaketh over it.
And the land of Judah shall be a terror unto Egypt, every one that maketh mention thereof
shall be afraid in himself because of the counsel of the Lord of hosts, which he hath
determined against it.
In that day shall five cities in the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and
swear to the Lord of hosts, one shall be called the city of destruction.
In that day shall there be an altar to the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt, and
a pillar at the border thereof to the Lord.
And it shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the Lord of hosts in the land of Egypt,
for they shall cry unto the Lord because of the oppressors, and he shall send them a Savior
and a great one, and he shall deliver them.
And the Lord shall be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know the Lord in that
day, and shall do sacrifice and oblation, yea, they shall vow a vow unto the Lord and
perform it.
And the Lord shall smite Egypt, he shall smite and heal it, and they shall return even to
the Lord, and he shall be entreated of them, and shall heal them.
In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Syria, and the Assyrians shall come
into Egypt and the Egyptians into Assyria, and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians.
In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, even a blessing in
the midst of the land, whom the Lord of hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt, my
people, and Assyria, the work of my hands, and Israel, mine inheritance.
Chapter 20
In the year that Tartan came unto Ashdod, when Sargon the king of Assyria sent him,
and fought against Ashdod and took it, at the same time spake the Lord by Isaiah the
black cloth from off thy loins, and put off thy shoe from thy foot, and he did so, walking
naked and barefoot.
And the Lord said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot three years,
for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon Ethiopia, so shall the king of Assyria lead
away the Egyptian prisoners and the Ethiopians captives, young and old, naked and barefoot,
even with their buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt.
They shall be afraid, and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation, and of Egypt their glory.
And the inhabitant of this isle shall say in that day, Behold, such is our expectation,
whither we flee for help to be delivered from the king of Assyria, and how shall we escape?
Chapter 21
The Burden of the Desert of the Sea
As whirlwinds in the south pass through, so it cometh from the desert from a terrible
land.
A grievous vision is declared unto me, the treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously,
and the spoiler spoileth.
Go up, O Elam, besiege, O Media, all the sign thereof have I made to cease.
Therefore are my loins filled with pain, pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a
woman that travelleth.
I was bowed down at the hearing of it, I was dismayed at the seeing of it.
My heart panted, fearfulness affrightened me, the night of my pleasure hath he turned
to do fear unto me.
Prepare the table, watch in the watch-tower, eat, drink, arise ye princes, and anoint the
shield.
For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Go, set a watchman, let him declare what he seeth.
And he saw a chariot with a couple of horsemen, a chariot of asses, and a chariot of camels,
and he hearkened diligently with much heed.
And he cried, A lion, my lord, I stand continually upon the watch-tower in the day-time, and
I am set in my ward whole nights.
And behold, here cometh a chariot of men with a couple of horsemen.
And he answered and said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and all the graven images of her
gods he hath broken unto the ground.
O my threshing and the corn of my floor, that which I have heard of the Lord of hosts, the
God of Israel, have I declared unto you.
The burden of Duma.
He calleth to me out of seer, Watchman, what of the night, watchman, what of the night?
The watchman said, The morning cometh, and also the night.
If ye will inquire, inquire ye, return, come.
The burden upon Arabia.
In the forest in Arabia shall ye lodge, O ye travelling companies of Dedanim.
The inhabitants of the land of Tima brought water to him that was thirsty.
They prevented with their bread him that fled.
For they fled from the swords, from the drawn swords, and from the bent bow, and from the
grievousness of war.
For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Within a year, according to the years of an hireling,
and all the glory of Keter shall fail.
And the residue of the number of archers, the mighty men of the children of Keter, shall
be diminished, for the Lord God of Israel hath spoken it.
22. The Burden of the Valley of Vision. What aileth thee now, that thou art wholly gone
up to the housetops? Thou that art full of stirs, a tumultuous city, joyous city, thy
slain men are not slain with a sword, nor dead in battle. All thy rulers are fled together,
they are bound by the archers. All that are found in thee are bound together, which have
fled from afar. Therefore said I, Look away from me, I will weep bitterly. Labor not to
comfort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people. For it is a day of
trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity by the Lord God of Hosts in the Valley of
Vision, breaking down the walls, and of crying to the mountains. And Elam bare the quiver
with chariots of men and horsemen, and Curran covered the shield. And it shall come to pass,
that thy choicest valleys shall be full of chariots, and the horsemen shall set themselves
in array at the gate. And he discovered the covering of Judah, and now did its look in
that day to the armor of the house of the forest. Ye have seen also the breaches of
the city of David, that they are many, and ye gathered together the waters of the lower
pool. And ye have numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses have ye broken down to fortify
the wall. Ye made also a ditch between the two walls for the water of the old pool, but
ye have not looked unto the Maker thereof, neither had respect unto him that fashioned
it long ago. And in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning,
and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth, and behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen,
and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine. Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we
shall die. And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts, surely this iniquity
shall not be purged from you till ye die, said the Lord God of Hosts. Thus said the
Lord God of Hosts, Go, get thee unto this treasurer, even unto Shebna, which is over
the house, and say, What hast thou here, and whom hast thou here, that thou hast hewed
thee out a sepulchre here, as he that heweth him out a sepulchre on high, and that graveth
an habitation for himself in a rock? Behold, the Lord will carry thee away with a mighty
captivity, and will surely cover thee. He will surely violently turn and toss thee like
a ball into a large country. There shalt thou die, and there the chariots of thy glory
shall be the shame of thy Lord's house. And I will drive thee from thy station, and from
thy state shall he pull thee down. And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will
call my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, and I will clothe him with thy robe, and strengthen
him with thy girdle. And I will commit thy government into his hand, and he shall be
a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah. And the key of
the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder, so he shall open, and none shall shut, and
I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place, and he shall be for a glorious throne to his
father's house. And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's house, the offspring
and the issue, all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups even to the vessels
of flagons. In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, shall the nail that is fastened in
the sure place be removed, and be cut down, and fall, and the burden that was upon it
shall be cut off, for the Lord hath spoken it.
Chapter 23
The Burden of Tyre
How ye ships of Tarshish! for it is laid waste, so that there is no house, no entering in,
from the land of Ketim it is revealed to them. Be still ye inhabitants of the Isle, thou
whom the merchants of Zidon that pass over the sea have replenished, and by great waters
the seed of Sihor, the harvest of the river, is her revenue, and she is a mart of nations.
Be thou ashamed, O Zidon, for the sea hath spoken even the strength of the sea, saying,
I travel not, nor bring forth children, neither do I nourish up young men, nor bring up virgins.
As at the report concerning Egypt, so shall they be sorely pained at the report of Tyre.
Pass ye over to Tarshish! How, ye inhabitants of the Isle! Is this your joyous city, whose
antiquity is of ancient days? Her own feet shall carry her far off to Sojourn. Who hath
taken this council against Tyre, the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose traffickers
are the honourable of the earth? The Lord of Hosts hath purposed it, to stain the pride
of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honourable of the earth.
Pass through thy land as a river, O daughter of Tarshish, there is no more strength. He
stretched out his hand over the sea, he shook the kingdoms, the Lord hath given a commandment
against the merchant city, to destroy the strongholds thereof. And he said, Thou shalt
no more rejoice, O thou oppressed virgin, daughter of Zidon, arise, pass over to Khitim,
there also shalt thou have no rest. Behold, the land of the Chaldeans, this people was
not till the Assyrians founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness. They set up
the towers thereof, they raised up the palaces thereof, and he brought it to ruin.
How ye ships of Tarshish, for your strength is laid waste, and it shall come to pass in
that day, that Tyre shall be forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one king,
after the end of seventy years, shall Tyre sing as in harlot. Take and harp, go about
the city, thou harlot that hast been forgotten, make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou
mayest be remembered. And it shall come to pass, after the end of seventy years, that
the Lord will visit Tyre, and she shall turn to her hire, and shall commit fornication
with all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth. And her merchandise and
her hire shall be holiness to the Lord, it shall not be treasured nor laid up, for her
merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and for durable
clothing.
Chapter 24 Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty,
and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants
thereof. And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest, as with the servant, so
with his master, as with the maid, so with her mistress, as with the buyer, so with the
seller, as with the lender, so with the borrower, as with the taker of usury, so with the giver
of usury to him. The land shall be utterly emptied and utterly spoiled, for the Lord
hath spoken this word. The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world languisheth and
fadeth away, the haughty people of the earth do languish. The earth also is defiled under
the inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance,
broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they
that dwell therein are desolate, therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned and
few men left. The new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth, all the merry-hearted do sigh.
The mirth of tabarettes ceaseth, the noise of them that rejoice endeth, the joy of the
harp ceaseth. They shall not drink wine with a song, strong drink shall be bitter to them
that drink it. The city of confusion is broken down, every house is shut up, that no man
may come in. There is a crying for wine in the streets, all joy is darkened, the mirth
of the land is gone. In the city is left desolation, and the gate is smitten with destruction.
When thus it shall be in the midst of the land among the people, there shall be as the
shaking of an olive tree, and as the gleaning grapes when the vintage is gone. They shall
lift up their voices, they shall sing for the majesty of the Lord, they shall cry aloud
from the sea. Wherefore glorify ye the Lord in the fires, even the name of the Lord God
of Israel in the isle of the sea. From the uttermost part of the earth have we heard
songs, even glory to the righteous, but I said, My leanness, my leanness woe unto me,
the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously, yea the treacherous dealers have dealt very
treacherously. Fear and the pit and the snare are upon thee, O inhabitant of the earth,
and it shall come to pass, that he who fleeeth from the noise of the fear shall fall into
the pit, and he that cometh up out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare,
for the windows from on high are open, and the foundations of the earth do shake, and
the earth is utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly.
The earth shall reel to and fro like a trunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage, and
the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it, and it shall fall and not rise again,
and it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall punish the host of the high
ones that are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth, and they shall be gathered
together as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and
after many days shall they be visited. Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun
ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mt. Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his
angels gloriously.
25. O Lord, thou art my God! I will exalt thee, I will praise thy name, for thou hast done
wonderful things, thy counsels of old are faithfulness and truth, for thou hast made
of a city a heap, of a defenced city a ruin, a palace of strangers to be no city, it shall
never be built. Therefore shall the strong people glorify thee, the city of the terrible
nations shall fear thee, for thou hast been a strength to the poor, a strength to the
needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of
the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall. Thou shalt bring down the noise of strangers,
as the heat in a dry place, even the heat with the shadow of a cloud, the branch of the terrible
ones shall be brought low. And in this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a
feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees
well refined. And he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all people,
and the veil that is spread over all nations. He will swallow up death in victory, and the Lord God
will wipe away tears from off all faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off
all the earth, for the Lord hath spoken it. And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God,
we have waited for him, and he will save us, this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be
glad and rejoice in his salvation. For in this mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest, and Moab
shall be trodden down under him, even as straw is trodden down for the dung hill. And he shall
spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim,
and he shall bring down their pride together with the spoils of their hands. And the fortress of the
high fort of thy walls shall he bring down, lay low, and bring to the ground, even to the dust.
Chapter 26. In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah. We have a strong city,
salvation will God appoint for the walls and bulwarks. Open ye the gates that the righteous
nation which keepeth the truth may enter in. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace,
whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusteth in thee. Trust ye in the Lord forever,
for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. For he bringeth down them that dwell on high.
The lofty city he layeth it low, he layeth it low even to the ground, he bringeth it even to the dust.
The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy.
The way of the just is uprightness. Thou most upright dost weigh the path of the just.
Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, we have waited for thee.
The desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.
With my soul have I desired thee in the night. Yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee
early. For when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness.
Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness.
In the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the Lord.
Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see,
and be ashamed for their envy at the people. Yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devour them.
Lord, thou wilt ordain peace for us, for thou also hast wrought all our works in us.
O Lord our God, other Lords beside thee have had dominion over us, but by thee only will we make
mention of thy name. They are dead, they shall not live. They are deceased, they shall not rise.
Therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, and made all their memory to perish.
Thou hast increased the nation, O Lord. Thou hast increased the nation.
Thou art glorified. Thou hast removed it far unto all the ends of the earth.
Lord, in trouble have they visited thee. They poured out a prayer when thy chastening was
upon them. Like as a woman with child that draweth near the time of her delivery is in pain,
and crieth out in her pangs, so have we been in thy sight, O Lord. We have been with child,
we have been in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind, we have not wrought any deliverance
in the earth, neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen. Thy dead men shall live,
together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust,
for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Come, my people,
enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee. Hide thyself, as it were,
for a little moment, until the indignation be overpassed. For behold, the Lord cometh out of
his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity. The earth also shall disclose
her blood, and shall no more cover her slain. Chapter 27. In that day the Lord with his saw
and great and strong sword shall punish Leviathan the piercing serpent, even Leviathan that crooked
serpent, and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea. In that day sing ye unto her a vineyard
of red wine. I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment, lest any hurt it I will keep it
night and day. Fury is not in me. Who would set the briers and thorns against me in battle?
I would go through them, I would burn them together. Or let him take hold of my strength,
that he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me. He shall cause them that come of
Jacob to take root. Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit.
Hath he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? Or is he slain according to the
order of them that are slain by him? In measure, when it shooteth forth,
thou wilt debate with it. He stayeth this rough wind in the day of the east wind. By this therefore
shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin. When he
maketh all the stones of the altar as chalk stones that are beaten in the sunder, the groves and
images shall not stand up. Yet the defenced city shall be desolate, and the habitation forsaken and
left like a wilderness. There shall the calf feed, and there shall he lie down and consume the
branches thereof. When the boughs thereof are withered, they shall be broken off. The women
come and set them on fire, for it is a people of no understanding. Therefore he that made them will
not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no favour. And it shall come to
pass in that day, that the Lord shall beat off from the channel of the river unto the stream of
Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel. And it shall come to pass
in that day, that the great trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready to
perish in the land of Assyria and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shall worship the Lord
in the holy mount at Jerusalem.
28. Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty is a fading
flower, which are on the head of the fat valleys of them that are overcome with wine. Behold,
the Lord hath a mighty and strong one, which as a tempest of hail and a destroying storm,
as a flood of mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to the earth with the hand. The crown
of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, shall be trodden under feet, and the glorious beauty which is on
the head of the fat valley shall be a fading flower, and as the hasty fruit before the summer,
which when he that looketh upon it seeth, while it is yet in his hand, he eateth it up. In that
day shall the Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty unto the residue
of his people, and for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for strength
to them that turn the battle to the gate. But they also have erred through wine, and through
strong drink are out of the way. The priest and the prophet have erred through strong drink,
they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through strong drink, they err in vision,
they stumble in judgment. For all the tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is
no place clean. Whom shall he teach knowledge, and whom shall he make to understand doctrine?
Them that are weaned from the milk and drawn from the breasts. For precept must be upon precept,
precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little and there a little. For with
stammering lips and another tongue will he speak to this people. To whom he said, This is the rest
wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest, and this is the refreshing. Yet they would not hear. But the
word of the Lord was unto them, precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line,
line upon line, here a little and there a little, that they might go and fall backward, and be broken
and snared and taken. Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men, that rule this people
which is in Jerusalem. Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell
we are at agreement. When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us.
For we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood we have hid ourselves. Therefore thus saith the
Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious cornerstone,
a sure foundation. He that believeth shall not make haste. Judgment also will I lay to the line,
and righteousness to the plummet. And the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the
waters shall overflow the hiding place. And your covenant with death shall be disannulled,
and your agreement with hell shall not stand. When the overflowing scourge shall pass through,
then ye shall be trodden down by it. From the time that it goeth forth, it shall take you. For
morning by morning shall it pass over, by day and by night. And it shall be a vexation only to
understand the report. For the bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on it,
and the covering narrower than that he can wrap himself in it. For the Lord shall rise up,
as in Mount Perazim. He shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work,
his strange work, and bring to pass his act, his strange act. Now therefore be ye not mockers,
lest your bands be made strong. For I have heard from the Lord God of hosts a consumption,
even determined upon the whole earth. Give ye ear, and hear my voice. Harken, and hear my speech.
Doth the ploughman plough all day to sow? Doth he open and break the clods of his ground? When he
hath made plain the face thereof, doth he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cumin,
and cast in the principal wheat, and in the appointed barley, and the rye in their place?
For his God doth instruct him to discretion, and doth teach him. For the fitches are not threshed
with a threshing instrument, neither is the cart wheel turned about upon the common. But the
fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the common with a rod. Breadcorn is bruised, because
he will not ever be threshing it, nor break it with the wheel of his cart, nor bruise it with
his horsemen. This also cometh forth from the Lord of hosts, which is wonderful in counsel,
and excellent in working. Isaiah chapter 29.
Woe to Ariel, to Ariel the city where David dwelt! Add ye year to year, let them kill sacrifices.
Yet I will distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow, and it shall be unto me as
Ariel. And I will camp against thee round about, and will lay siege against thee with a mount,
and I will raise forts against thee. And thou shalt be brought down, and thou shalt speak out
the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be as of one that
hath a familiar spirit out of the ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust.
Moreover, the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small dust, and the multitude of the
terrible ones shall be as chuff that passeth away. Yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly.
Thou shalt be visited of the Lord of hosts with thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise,
with storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire. And the multitude of all the nations that
fight against Ariel, even all that fight against her and her munition, and that distress her,
shall be as a dream of a night vision. It shall even be as when a hungry man dreameth, and behold
he eateth, but he awakeeth, and his soul is empty. Or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and behold he
drinketh, but he awakeeth, and behold he is faint, and his soul hath appetite. So shall the multitude
of all the nations be that fight against Mount Zion. Stay yourselves and wonder. Cry ye out,
and cry, They are drunken, but not with wine. They stagger, but not with strong drink. For the Lord
hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes. The prophets and your
rulers, the seers, hath he covered. And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book
that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee. And he
saith, I cannot, for it is sealed. And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying,
Read this, I pray thee. And he saith, I am not learned. For as much as this people draw near me
with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me,
and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men. Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a
marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder. For the wisdom of their wise
men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. Woe unto them that seek
deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who
seeth us, and who knoweth us? Surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the
potter's clay. For shall the work say of him that made it, He made me not? Or shall the thing framed
say of him that framed it, He had no understanding. Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall
be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest? And in that
shall see out of obscurity and out of darkness. The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord,
and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel. For the terrible one is brought
to nought, and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off. That make a
man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveeth in the gate, and turn aside
the just for a thing of nought. Therefore thus saith the Lord who redeemed Abraham concerning the
Jacob. Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale. But when he seeth
his children, the work of mine hands in the midst of him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify
the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel. They also that erred in spirit shall come
to understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine. Isaiah chapter 30. Woe to the
rebellious children, saith the Lord, that take counsel but not of me, and that cover with the
covering, but not of my spirit, that they may add sin to sin, that walk to go down into Egypt,
and have not asked at my mouth, to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to
trust in the shadow of Egypt. Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust
in the shadow of Egypt your confusion. For his princes were at Zohan, and his ambassadors came
to Hainis. They were all ashamed for people that could not profit them, nor be in help nor profit,
but a shame, and also a reproach. The burden of the beasts of the south, into the land of trouble
and anguish, from whence came the young and old lion, the viper and fiery flying serpent. They will
carry their riches upon the shoulders of young asses, and their treasures upon the bunches of
camels, to a people that shall not profit them. For the Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no
purpose. Therefore have I cried concerning this. Their strength is to sit still. Now go, write it
for them in a table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come forever and ever,
that this is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord,
which say to the seers, see not, and to the prophets, prophesy not unto us right things,
speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits, get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path,
cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us. Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel,
because you despise this word, and trust in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon,
therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall,
whose breaking cometh suddenly at an instant. And he shall break it as the breaking of the potter's
vessel that is broken in pieces. He shall not spare, so that there shall not be found in the
bursting of it a shard to take fire from the hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit.
For thus saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, in returning and rest shall you be saved.
In quietness and in confidence shall be your strength, and ye would not. But ye said,
No, for we will flee upon horses, therefore shall ye flee. And we will ride upon the swift,
therefore shall they that pursue you be swift. One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one,
at the rebuke of five shall ye flee, till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain,
and as an ensign on a hill. And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto you,
and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you. For the Lord is a God of judgment,
blessed are all they that wait for him. For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem,
thou shalt weep no more, he will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry.
When he shall hear it, he will answer thee. And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity
and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy textures be removed into a corner any more,
but thine eyes shall see thy textures, and thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying,
This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand and when ye turn to the left.
Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten
images of gold. Thou shalt cast them away as a menstrous cloth, thou shalt say unto it,
Get thee hence. Then shall he give the rain of thy seed, that thou shalt sow the ground withal,
and bread of the increase of the earth, and it shall be fat and plenteous. In that day shall
thy cattle feed in large pastures. The oxen likewise and the young asses that ear the ground
shall eat clean provender, which hath been winnowed with the shovel and with the fan.
And there shall be upon every high mountain and upon every high hill rivers and streams of water
in the day of the great slaughter when the towers fall. Moreover the light of the moon shall be as
the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold as the light of seven days,
in the day that the Lord bindeth up the breach of his people and healeth the stroke of their wound.
Behold the name of the Lord cometh from far burning with his anger, and the burden thereof
is heavy. His lips are full of indignation and his tongue as a devouring fire, and his breath as an
overflowing stream shall reach to the midst of the neck to sift the nations with the sieve of
vanity, and there shall be a bridle in the jaws of the people causing them to err. Ye shall have a
song as in the night when a holy solemnity is kept, and gladness of heart as when one goeth with a
pipe to come into the mountain of the Lord to the mighty one of Israel. And the Lord shall cause his
glorious voice to be heard, and shall show the lighting down of his arm with the indignation of
his anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire with scattering and tempest and hailstones.
For through the voice of the Lord shall the Assyrian be beaten down which smote with a rod,
and in every place where the grounded staff shall pass which the Lord shall lay upon him,
it shall be with tablets and harps, and in battles of shaking will he fight with it.
For Tophet is ordained of old, yea, for the king it is prepared, he hath made it deep and large,
the pile thereof is fire and much wood. The breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth
kindle it.
recordings are in the public domain for more information or to volunteer please
them that go down to Egypt for help and stay on horses and trust in chariots
because they are many and in horsemen because they are very strong but they
look not unto the Holy One of Israel neither seek the Lord yet he also is wise
and will bring evil and will not call back his words but will arise against
the house of the evildoers and against the help of them that work in equity now
the Egyptians are men and not God and their horses flesh and not spirit when
the Lord shall stretch out his hand both he that helpeth shall fall and he that
down and they all shall fail together for thus have the Lord spoken unto me
like as the lion and the young lion roaring on his prey when a multitude of
shepherds is called forth against him he will not be afraid of their voice nor
abase himself for the noise of them so shall the Lord of hosts come down to
fight for Mount Zion and for the hill thereof as birds flying so will the Lord
of hosts defend Jerusalem defending also he will deliver it and passing over he
will preserve it turn ye unto him from whom the children of Israel have deeply
revolted for in that day every man shall cast away his idols of silver and his
idols of gold which your own hands have made unto you for a sin then shall the
Assyrian fall with the sword not of a mighty man and the sword not of a mean
man shall devour him but he shall flee from the sword and his young men shall
be discomforted and he shall pass over to his stronghold for fear and his
princes shall be afraid of the ensign sayeth the Lord whose fire is in Zion
and his furnace in Jerusalem chapter 32 behold a king shall reign in
righteousness and princes shall rule in judgment and a man shall be as an
hiding place from the wind and a covet from the tempest as rivers of water in a
dry place as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land and the eyes of them
shall not be dim and the ears of them that here shall haken the heart also of
the rash shall understand knowledge and the tongue of the stammerers shall be
ready to speak plainly the vile person shall be no more called liberal nor the
churl said to be bountiful for the vile person will speak villainy and his heart
will work iniquity to practice hypocrisy and to utter error against the Lord to
make empty the soul of the hungry and he will cause the drink of the thirsty to
fail the instruments also of the churl are evil he deviseth wicked devices to
destroy the poor with lying words even when the needy speaketh right but the
liberal deviseth liberal things and by liberal things shall he stand rise up ye
women that are at ease hear my voice ye careless daughters give ear unto my
speech many days and years shall you be troubled ye careless women for the
vintage shall fail the gathering shall not come tremble ye women that are at
ease be troubled ye careless ones strip you and make you bare and gird sackcloth
upon your loins they shall lament for the teats for the pleasant fields for
the fruitful vine upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briars
yay upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city because the palaces shall
be forsaken the multitude of the city shall be left the forts and towers shall
be for dens forever a joy of wild asses a pasture of flocks until the spirit be
fought upon us from on high and the wilderness be a fruitful field and the
fruitful field be counted for a forest then judgment shall dwell in the
wilderness and righteousness remain in the fruitful field and the work of
righteousness shall be peace and the effect of righteousness quietness and
assurance forever and my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation and in
shore dwellings and in quiet resting places when it shall hail coming down on
the forest and the city shall be low in a low place blessed are ye that so
beside all waters that send forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass
chapter 33 woe to thee that spoilest and thou was not spoiled and dealers
treacherously and they dealt not treacherously with thee when thou shalt
cease to spoil thou shalt be spoiled and when thou shalt make an end to deal
treacherously they shall deal treacherously with thee O Lord be gracious
unto us we have waited for thee be thou their arm every morning our salvation
also in the time of trouble at the noise of the tumult the people fled at the
lifting up of thyself the nations were scattered and your spoil shall be
gathered like the gathering of the caterpillar as the running to and fro of
locusts shall he run upon them the Lord is exalted for he dwelleth on high he
has filled Zion with judgment and righteousness and wisdom and knowledge
shall be the stability of thy times and strength of salvation the fear of the
Lord is his treasure behold their valiant ones shall cry without the
ambassadors of peace shall weep bitterly the highways lie waste the wayfaring man
ceaseth he hath broken the covenant he hath despised the cities he regardeth no
man the earth mourneth and languisheth Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down Sharon
is like a wilderness and Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits now will I
rise saith the Lord now will I be exalted now will I lift up myself ye shall
conceive chaff ye shall bring forth stubble your breath as fire shall devour
you and the people shall be as the burnings of lime as thorns cut up shall
they be burned in the fire here ye that are far off what I have done and ye
that are near acknowledge my might the sinners in Zion are afraid fearfulness
hath surprised the hypocrites who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire
who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings he that walketh
righteously and speaketh uprightly he that despiseth the gain of oppressions
that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes that stop at his ears from
hearing of blood and shut at his eyes from seeing evil he shall dwell on high
his place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks bread shall be given
him his waters shall be sure thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty they
shall behold the land that is very far off thine heart shall meditate terror
where is the scribe where is the receiver where is he that counted the
towers thou shalt not see a fierce people a people of a deeper speech than
thou canst perceive of a stammering tongue that thou canst not understand
look upon Zion the city of our celebrities thine eyes shall see
Jerusalem a quiet habitation a tabernacle that shall not be taken down
not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed neither shall any of the
cords thereof be broken but there the glorious Lord will be unto us a place
of broad rivers and streams wherein shall go no galley with oars neither shall
gallant ship pass thereby for the Lord is our judge the Lord is our lawgiver
the Lord is our King he will save us thy tacklings are loosed they could not
well strengthen their mast they could not spread the sail then is the prey of
a great spoil divided the lame take the prey and the inhabitants shall not say I
am sick the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven for their iniquity
you
34.
Come near, ye nations, to hear, and hearken, ye people.
Let the earth hear, and all that is therein,
the world and all things that come forth of it.
For the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations,
and his fury upon all their armies.
He hath utterly destroyed them,
he hath delivered them to the slaughter.
Their slain also shall be cast out,
and their stink shall come up out of their carcasses,
and the mountains shall be melted with their blood.
And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved,
and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll,
and all their host shall fall down,
as the leaf falleth off from the vine,
and as a falling fig from the fig-tree.
For my sword shall be bathed in heaven.
Behold, it shall come down upon Idumea,
and upon the people of my curse to judgment.
The sword of the Lord is filled with blood.
It is made fat with fatness,
and with the blood of lambs and goats,
with the fat of the kidneys of rams.
For the Lord hath a sacrifice in Basra,
and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea.
And the unicorns shall come down with them,
and the bullocks with the bulls,
and their land shall be soaked with blood,
and their dust made fat with fatness.
For it is the day of the Lord's vengeance,
and the year of recompenses for the controversy of Zion.
And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch,
and the dust thereof into brimstone,
and the land thereof shall become burning pitch.
It shall not be quenched night nor day.
The smoke thereof shall go up for ever,
from generation to generation it shall lie waste.
None shall pass through it for ever and ever.
But the cormorant and the bittern shall possess it.
The owl also and the raven shall dwell in it,
and he shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion,
and the stones of emptiness.
They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom,
but none shall be there,
and all her princes shall be nothing.
And thorns shall come up in her palaces,
nettles and brambles in the fortresses thereof,
and it shall be in habitation of dragons,
and a court for owls.
The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet
with the wild beasts of the island,
and the sadder shall cry to his fellow.
The screech owl also shall rest there,
and find for herself a place of rest.
There shall the great owl make her nest and lay,
and hatch and gather under her shadow.
There shall the vultures also be gathered,
every one with her mate.
Seek ye out the book of the Lord, and read,
No one of these shall fail.
None shall want her mate.
For my mouth it had commanded,
and his spirit it had gathered them.
And he hath cast the lot for them,
and his hand hath divided it unto them by line.
They shall possess it for ever.
From generation to generation shall they dwell therein.
The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them,
and the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose.
It shall blossom abundantly,
and rejoice even with joy and singing.
The glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it,
the excellency of Carmel and Sharon.
They shall see the glory of the Lord,
and the excellency of our God.
Strengthen ye the weak hands,
and confirm the feeble knees.
Say to them that are of a fearful heart,
Be strong, fear not.
Behold, your God will come with vengeance,
even God with a recompense.
He will come and save you.
Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened,
and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.
Then shall the lame man leap as in heart,
and the tongue of the dumb sing.
For in the wilderness shall waters break out,
and streams in the desert,
and the parched ground shall become a pool,
and the thirsty land springs of water.
In the habitations of dragons,
where each lay shall be grass with reeds and rushes,
and an highway shall be there, and a way,
and it shall be called the way of holiness.
The unclean shall not pass over it,
but it shall be for those, the wayfaring men,
though fools, shall not err therein.
No lion shall be there,
nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon.
It shall not be found there,
but the redeemed shall walk there.
And the ransomed of the Lord shall return,
and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads.
They shall obtain joy and gladness,
and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.
Chapter 36
Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah
that Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the defenced cities of Judah and took them.
And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakei from Lachish to Jerusalem unto King Hezekiah with
the great army, and he stood by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the Fuller's field.
Then came forth unto him Eliakim, Hilkiah's son, which was over the house,
and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, Asaph's son, the recorder.
And Rabshakei said unto them,
Say ye now to Hezekiah.
Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria.
What confidence is this wherein thou trustest?
I say, sayest thou, but they are but vain words.
I have counsel and strength for war.
Now on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebellest against me?
Lo, thou trustest in the staff of this broken reed on Egypt,
whereon if a man lean it will go into his hand and pierce it.
So is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that trust in him.
But if thou say to me, We trust in the Lord our God,
is it not he whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away,
and said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar?
Now therefore give privileges, I pray thee, to my master the king of Assyria,
and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.
How then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master's servant,
and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?
And am I now come up without the Lord against this land to destroy it?
The Lord said unto me, Go up against this land and destroy it.
Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah unto Rabshakei,
Speak, I pray thee, unto thy servants in the Syrian language, for we understand it,
and speak not to us in the Jews' language in the ears of the people that are on the wall.
But Rabshakei said, Hath my master sent me to thy master and to thee to speak these words?
Hath he not sent me to the men that sit upon the wall that they may eat their own dung
and drink their own piss with you? Then Rabshakei stood, and cried with a loud
voice in the Jews' language, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of Assyria.
Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you, for he shall not be able to deliver you.
Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the Lord, saying, The Lord will surely deliver us.
This city shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.
Harken not to Hezekiah, for thus saith the king of Assyria,
Make an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me,
And eat ye every one of his vine and every one of his fig tree,
And drink ye every one the waters of his own cistern,
Until I come and take you away to a land like your own land,
A land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards.
Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, The Lord will deliver us.
Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?
Where are the gods of Hamath and Arphad? Where are the gods of Seferveim?
And have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?
Who are they among all the gods of these lands that have delivered their land out of my hand,
That the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?
But they held their peace, and answered him not a word,
For the king's commandment was, saying, Answer him not.
Then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, that was over the household,
And Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder,
To Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabshakei.
CHAPTERS 37-39
OF THE BOOK OF ISAIAH
THIS IS A LIBROVOX RECORDING
ALL LIBROVOX RECORDINGS
ARE IN THE PUBLIC DOMAIN
FOR MORE INFORMATION
OR TO VOLUNTEER
PLEASE VISIT LIBROVOX DOT ORG
THE BOOK OF ISAIAH
KING JAMES VERSION
CHAPTER 37
And it came to pass,
when King Hezekiah heard it,
that he rent his clothes,
and covered himself with sackcloth,
and went into the house of the Lord.
And he sent Ilekin,
who was over the household of Shebna,
the scribe,
and the elders of the priests
covered with sackcloth
unto Isaiah the prophet,
the son of Amoz.
And they said unto him,
Thus saith Hezekiah,
This day is a day of trouble,
and of rebuke,
and of blasphemy.
For the children are come to birth,
and there is not strength
to bring forth.
It may be the Lord thy God
will hear the words of Rebshaka,
whom the king of Assyria,
his master, hath sent
to reproach the living God,
and will reprove the words
which the Lord thy God hath heard,
wherefore lift up thy prayer
for the remnant that is left.
So the servants of King Hezekiah
came to Isaiah,
and Isaiah said unto them,
Thus shall ye say unto your master,
Thus saith the Lord,
Be not afraid of the words
of that thou hast heard,
wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria
have blasphemed me.
Behold, I will send a blast upon him,
and he shall hear a rumor,
and return to his own land,
and I will cause him to fall
by the sword in his own land.
So Rebshaka returned
and found the king of Assyria
warring against Libna,
for he had heard that he was
departed from Lekish.
And he heard saying concerning,
Terhakka, king of Ethiopia,
he is come forth to make war with thee,
and when he heard it,
he sent messages to Hezekiah saying,
Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah,
king of Judah, saying,
Let not thy God in whom thou trustest
deceive thee,
saying Jerusalem shall not be given
into the hand of the king of Assyria.
Behold, thou hast heard
what the kings of Assyria have done
to all lands by destroying them utterly,
and shalt thou be delivered?
Have the gods of the nations delivered them
which my fathers have destroyed
in Gozan, and Haran, and Rezef,
and the children of Eden,
which were in Tel Azhar?
Where is the king of Hamath,
and the king of Arphad,
and the king of the city of Sephirvaeum,
Hanna, and Iva?
And Hezekiah received the letter
from the hand of the messengers,
and read it, and Hezekiah went up
into the house of the Lord,
and spread it before the Lord,
and Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord,
saying, O Lord of hosts,
God of Israel,
thou dwellest between the cherubim,
thou art God even thou alone.
Of all the kingdoms of the earth,
thou hast made heaven and earth.
Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear.
Open thine eyes, O Lord, and see,
and hear all the words of Sennacherib,
which hath sent to reproach the living God.
Of a truth, Lord, the kings of Assyria
have laid waste all the nations
and their countries,
and have cast their gods into the fire,
for they were no gods,
but the work of men's hands, wood, and stone.
Therefore, they have destroyed them.
Now therefore, O Lord, our God,
save us from His hand,
that all the kingdoms of the earth may know
that thou art the Lord even thou only.
Then Isaiah, the son of Amoz,
sent unto Hezekiah, saying,
Thus saith the Lord God of Israel,
whereas thou hast prayed to me
against Sennacherib, king of Assyria,
this is the word which the Lord
hath spoken concerning him.
The virgin, the daughter of Zion,
hath despised thee,
and lathed thee to scorn,
the daughter of Jerusalem
hath shaken her head at thee.
Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed,
and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice,
and lifted up thine eyes on high,
even against the Holy One of Israel?
By thy servants hast thou reproached the Lord,
and hast said, by the multitude of my chariots
am I come up to the height of the mountains,
to the sides of Lebanon,
and I will cut down the tall cedars thereof,
and the choice fir trees thereof,
and I will enter into the height of His border,
and the forest of His camel.
I have digged and drunk water,
and with the sole of my feet
have I dried up all the rivers of the besieged places.
Hast thou not heard long ago how I have done it,
and of ancient times that I have formed it?
Now have I brought it to pass,
that thou shouldest be to lay waste
defensed cities into ruinous heaps.
Therefore their inhabitants were of small power,
they were dismayed and confounded,
they were as the grass of the field,
and as the green herb,
as the grass on the housetops,
and as corn blasted before it be grown up.
But I know thy abode,
and thy going out and thy coming in,
and thy rage against me,
because thy rage against me,
and thy tumult is come up into mine ears,
therefore will I put my hook in thy nose,
and my bridle in thy lips,
and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest,
and this shall be a sign unto thee.
Ye shall eat this year which as groweth of itself,
and the second year that which springeth of the same,
and in the third year sow ye and reap,
and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof.
And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah,
shall take root downward and bear fruit upward.
For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant,
and they that escape out of Mount Zion,
the zeal of the Lord of hosts shall do this.
Therefore, thus sayeth the Lord
concerning the king of Assyria,
he shall not come into this city,
nor shoot an arrow there,
nor come before it with shields,
nor cast a bank against it.
By the way that he came, by the same shall he return,
and shall not come into this city, sayeth the Lord.
For I will defend this city,
to save it for mine own sake,
and for my servant David's sake.
Then the angel of the Lord went forth
and smote in the camp of the Assyrians
in hundred and four score and five thousand,
and when they arose early in the morning,
behold, they were all dead corpses.
So Sennacherib, king of Assyria departed
and went and returned and dwelt at Nineveh,
and he came to pass as he was worshiping
in the house of Nishrach, his god,
that Adramalek and Sherazer,
his sons, smote him with the sword,
and they escaped into the land of Armenia,
and Esharahadon, his son, reigned in his stead.
Chapter 38.
In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death,
and Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz,
came unto him and said unto him,
Thus saith the Lord, set thine house in order,
for thou shalt die and not live.
Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall
and prayed unto the Lord and said,
Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee,
how I have walked before thee in truth
and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which is good in thy sight.
And Hezekiah wept, soared.
Then came the word of the Lord to Isaiah saying,
Go and say to Hezekiah,
Thus saith the Lord, the God of David, thy father,
I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears.
Behold, I will add unto thy days 15 years,
and I will deliver thee and this city
out of the hand of the king of Assyria,
and I will defend this city.
And this shall be a sign unto thee from the Lord
that the Lord will do this thing that he hath spoken.
Behold, I will bring again the shadow of the degrees
which is gone down in the sundial of Ahaz,
10 degrees backward.
So the sun returned, 10 degrees,
by which degrees it was gone down.
The writing of Hezekiah, king of Judah,
when he had been sick and was recovered of his sickness,
I said in the cutting off of my days,
I shall go to the gates of the grave.
I am deprived of the residue of my years.
I said, I shall not see the Lord,
even the Lord in the land of the living.
I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world.
Mine age is departed and is removed from me
as a shepherd's tent.
I have cut off like a weaver my life.
He will cut me off with pining sickness from day.
Even tonight wilt thou make an end of me.
I reckoned till morning that as a lion,
so will he break all my bones.
From day even tonight wilt thou make an end of me.
Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter.
I did mourn as a dove.
Mine eyes failed with looking upward.
Oh Lord, I am oppressed.
Undertake for me, what shall I say?
He hath both spoken unto me and himself hath done it.
I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul.
Oh Lord, by these things men live.
And in all these things is the life of my spirit.
So wilt thou recover me and make me to live.
Behold for peace, I had great bitterness,
but thou hast in love to my soul delivered it
from the pit of corruption.
For thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.
For the grave cannot praise thee.
Death cannot celebrate thee.
They that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth.
The living, the living he shall praise thee
as I do this day.
The father to the children shall make known thy truth.
The Lord was ready to save me.
Therefore we will sing my songs to the stringed instruments
all the days of our life in the house of the Lord.
For Isaiah had said, let them take a lump of figs
and lay it for a plaster upon the boil and he shall recover.
Hezekiah also had said, what is the sign
that I shall go up to the house of the Lord?
Chapter 39.
At that time, Merodach Baladon,
the son of Baladon, king of Babylon,
sent letters and a present to Hezekiah.
For he had heard that he had been sick and was recovered.
And Hezekiah was glad of them and showed them
the house of his precious things,
the silver and the gold and the spices
and the precious ointment and all the house of his armor.
And all that was found in his treasures.
There was nothing in his house,
nor in all his dominion that Hezekiah showed them not.
Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah
and said unto him, what said these men?
And from whence came they unto thee?
And Hezekiah said, they are come from a far country
unto me, even from Babylon.
Then said he, what have they seen in thine house?
And Hezekiah answered, all that is in mine house
have they seen, there is nothing among my treasures
that I have not showed them.
Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah,
hear the word of the Lord of hosts.
Behold the days come that all that is in thine house
and that which thy fathers have laid up in store
until this day shall be carried to Babylon.
Nothing shall be left, saith the Lord.
And of thy sons that shall issue from thee,
which thou shalt beget, shall they take away
and they shall be eunuchs in the palace
of the king of Babylon.
Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah,
good is the word of the Lord which thou hast spoken.
He said moreover, for there shall be peace
and truth in my days.
The Book of Isaiah, King James Version, Chapter 40
Comfort ye, my people, saith your God. Speak ye comfortable to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned, for she hath received of the Lord's hand double for all her sins.
The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our God.
Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low, and the crooked shall be made straight and the rough places plain.
And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together. For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.
The voice said, Cry, and he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field.
The grass withereth, the flower fadeth, because the spirit of the Lord bloweth upon it. Surely the people is grass. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth, but the word of our God shall stand forever.
O Zion, that bringeth good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain, O Jerusalem, that bringeth good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength.
Lift it up, be not afraid, say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God.
Behold, the Lord God will come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him. Behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him.
He shall feed his flock like a shepherd. He shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young.
Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance?
Who hath directed the spirit of the Lord, or, being his counselor, hath taught him? With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and showed to him the way of understanding?
Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance. Behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing.
And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beast thereof sufficient for a burnt offering. All nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less than nothing and vanity.
To whom then will ye liken God, or what likeness will ye compare unto him? The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold and casteth silver chains.
He that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation chooseth a tree that will not rot, he seeketh unto him a cunning workman to prepare a graven image that shall not be moved.
Have ye not known? Have ye not heard? Hath it not been told you from the beginning? Have ye not understood from the foundations of the earth?
It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers, that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in.
That bringeth the princes to nothing, he maketh the judges of the earth as vanity. Yea, they shall not be planted, yea, they shall not be sown, yea, their stock shall not take root in the earth, and he shall also blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take them away as stuple.
To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal, saith the Holy One? Lift up your eyes on high, and behold, who hath created these things, that bringeth out their host by number? He calleth them all by names, by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in power, no one faileth.
Why sayeth thou, O Jacob, and speaketh, O Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God?
Hast thou not known, hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not? Neither is weary, there is no searching of his understanding, he giveth power to the faint, and to them that have no might, he increaseth strength.
Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall, but they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint.
Chapter 41. Keep silence before me, O islands, and let the people renew their strength, let them come near, let them speak, let us come near together to judgment.
Who raised up the righteous man from the east, called him to his foot, gave the nations before him, and made him rule over kings. He gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bowl.
He pursued them and passed safely, even by the way that he had not gone with his feet, who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the beginning, I, the Lord, the first, and with the last, I am he.
The isles saw it and feared. The ends of the earth were afraid, drew near and came. They helped every one his neighbor, and every one said to his brother, Be of good courage.
So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth with the hammer, him that smote the anvil, saying, It is ready for the soldering, and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.
But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob, whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham, my friend, thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my servant, I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.
Fear thou not, for I am with thee. Be not dismayed, for I am thy God. I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness.
Behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed and confounded. They shall be as nothing, and they that strive with thee shall perish.
Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, even them that contended with thee. They that war against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of naught. For I, the Lord thy God, will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, Fear not, I will help thee.
Fear not, thou worm, Jacob, and ye men of Israel, I will help thee, saith the Lord, and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument.
Having teeth, thou shalt thresh the mountains and beat them small, and shalt make the hills as shafts. Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them, and thou shalt rejoice in the Lord, and shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.
When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst, I, the Lord, will hear them. I, the God of Israel, will not forsake them.
I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys. I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water.
I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittar tree, and the myrtle, and the oil tree. I will set in the desert the fir tree and the pine, and the box tree together, that they may see and know and consider and understand together that the hand of the Lord hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it.
Produce your cause, saith the Lord. Bring forth your strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob. Let them, bring them forth, and show us what shall happen. Let them show the former things, what they be, that we may consider them, and know the latter end of them, or declare us things for to come.
Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know, that ye are gods, yea, do good or do evil, that we may be dismayed and behold it together.
Behold, ye are of nothing, and your work of not an abomination is he that chooseth you. I have raised up one from the north, and he shall come from the rising of the sun, shall he call upon my name.
He shall come upon princes as upon mortar, and as the potter treadeth clay, who hath declared from the beginning that we may know, and before time that we may say he is righteous, yea, there is none that showeth, yea, there is none that declareth, yea, there is none that heareth your words.
The first shall say to Zion, Behold, behold them, and I will give to Jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings, for I beheld, and there was no man, even among them, and there was no counselor, that when I asked of them could answer a word.
Behold, they are all vanity, their works are nothing, their molten images are wind and confusion.
Chapter 42. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth. I have put my spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.
He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street, a bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench.
He shall bring forth judgment unto truth, he shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth, and the isles shall wait for his law.
Thus saith God, the Lord, he that created the heavens and stretched them out, he that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of it, he that giveth breath unto the people, upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein.
I, the Lord, have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee, for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.
I am the Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images.
Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I declare before they spring forth, I tell you of them.
Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein, the isles and the inhabitants thereof.
Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice, the villages that Kedar doth inhabit, let the inhabitants of the rock sing, let them shout from the top of the mountains, let them give glory unto the Lord and declare his praise in the islands.
The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of war, he shall cry, yea, roar, he shall prevail against his enemies.
I have long time holding my peace, I have been still, and refrained myself, now will I cry, like a travailing woman, I will destroy and devour at once.
I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their herbs, and I will make the rivers islands, and I will dry up the pools, and I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not.
I will lead them in paths that they have not known, I will make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight, these things will I do unto them, and not forsake them.
They shall be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, that trust engraven images, that say to the molten images, ye are our gods.
Hear ye death, and look ye blind, that ye may see. Who is blind but my servant, or death as my messenger that I sent? Who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lord's servant, seeing many things, but thou observest not, opening the ears, but he heareth not.
The Lord is well pleased for his righteousness' sake, he will magnify the law and make it honorable, but this is a people robbed and spoiled, they are all of them snared in holes, and they are hid in prison houses, they are for a prey, and none delivereth for a spoil, and none saith restore.
Who among you will give ear to this? Who will hearken and hear for the time to come? Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers, did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned?
For they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law. Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle, and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he knew not, and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.
When thou passeth through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers they shall not overflow thee. When thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.
For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Savior. I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honorable, and I have loved thee.
Therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life. Fear not, for I am with thee. I will bring thy seed from the east and gather thee from the west. I will say to the north, give up, and to the south, keep not back.
Bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth, even every one that is called by my name. For I have created him for my glory, I have formed him, yea, I have made him.
Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears. Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be assembled. Who among them can declare this, and show us former things?
Let them bring forth their witnesses that they may be justified, or let them hear and say it is truth. Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant, whom I have chosen, that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he.
Before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me. I, even I am the Lord, and beside me there is no savior. I have declared and have saved.
I have showed when there was no strange God among you, therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, that I am God. Yea, before the day was I am he, and there is none that can deliver out of my hand.
I will work, and who shall let it? Thus saith the Lord, your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their nobles and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in the ships.
I am the Lord, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King. Thus saith the Lord, which maketh a way in the sea and a path in the mighty waters, which bringeth forth the chariot and the horse, the army and the power they shall lie down together.
They shall not rise, they are extinct, they are quenched as toad. Remember ye not the former things, neither consider the things of old. Behold, I will do a new thing, now it shall spring forth.
Shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness and rivers in the desert. The beasts of the field shall honor me, the dragons and the owls, because I give waters in the wilderness and rivers in the desert to give drink to my people, my chosen.
This people have I formed for myself, they shall show forth my praise. But thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou hast been weary of me, O Israel.
Thou hast not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt offerings, neither hast thou honored me with thy sacrifice. I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor weary thee with incense. Thou hast brought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices, but thou hast made me to serve with thy sins.
Thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities. I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake and will not remember thy sins. Put me in remembrance, let us plead together, declare thou that thou mayest be justified.
Thy first father hath sinned, and thy teachers have transgressed against me. Therefore I have profaned the princes of the sanctuary and have given Jacob to the curse and Israel to reproaches.
Chapter 44. Yet now hear, O Jacob, my servant, and Israel, whom I have chosen. Thus saith the Lord that made thee and formed thee from the womb, which will help thee. Fear not, O Jacob, my servant, and thou Jezaron, whom I have chosen.
For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground. I will pour my spirit upon thy seed and my blessing upon thine offspring.
And they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water-courses. One shall say, I am the Lord's, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord and surname himself by the name of Israel.
Thus saith the Lord, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer, the Lord of hosts. I am the first and I am the last, and beside me there is no God, and who as I shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in order for me.
Since I appointed the ancient people and the things that are coming and shall come, let them show unto them. Fear not, neither be afraid. Have not I told thee from that time and have declared it? Ye are even my witnesses. Is there a God beside me? Yea, there is no God. I know not any.
They that make a graven image are all of them vanity, and their delectable things shall not profit. And they are their own witnesses. They see not nor know that they may be ashamed. Who hath formed a God or molten a graven image that is profitable for nothing?
Behold, all his fellows shall be ashamed, and the workmen, they are of men. Let them all be gathered together. Let them stand up, yet they shall fear, and they shall be ashamed together.
The smith with the tongs both worketh in the coals and fashioneth it with hammers, and worketh it with the strength of his arms. Yea, he is hungry, and his strength faileth. He drinketh no water and is faint.
The carpenter stretcheth out his rule, he marketh it out with a line, he fitted it with planes, and marketh it out with the compass, and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the beauty of a man, that it may remain in the house.
He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak, which he strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the forest. He planteth in ash, and the rain doth nourish it.
Then shall it be for a man to burn, for he will take thereof and warm himself. Yea, he kindleeth it and baketh bread. Yea, he maketh a god and worshipeth it.
He maketh it a graven image, and falleth down thereto. He burneth part thereof in the fire. With part thereof he eateth flesh, he roasteth roast, and is satisfied.
Yea, he warmeth himself and sayeth, Aha, I am warm. I have seen the fire, and the residue thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image. He falleth down unto it and worshipeth it, and prayeth unto it, and sayeth, Deliver me, for thou art my god.
They have not known nor understood, for he hath shut their eyes that they cannot see, and their hearts that they cannot understand. And none considereth in his heart, neither is their knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the fire.
Yea, also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof. I have roasted flesh and eaten it, and shall make the residue thereof an abomination. Shall I fall down to the stock of a tree?
He feedeth on ashes. A deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?
Remember these, O Jacob and Israel, for thou art my servant, I have formed thee. Thou art my servant, O Israel, thou shalt not be forgotten of me.
I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins. Return unto me, for I have redeemed thee.
Sing, O ye heavens, for the Lord hath done it. Shout, ye lower parts of the earth. Break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein, for the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel.
Thus saith the Lord thy Redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I am the Lord that maketh all things, that stretcheth forth the heavens alone, that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself, that frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and maketh diviners mad, that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish.
That confirmeth the word of his servant, and performeth the counsel of his messengers, that saith to Jerusalem, thou shalt be inhabited, and to the cities of Judah, ye shall be built, and I will raise up the decayed places thereof.
That saith to the deep be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers, that saith to Cyrus, he is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, thou shalt be built, and to the temple thy foundation shall be laid.
Chapter 45 Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden to subdue nations before him, and I will loose the loins of kings to open before him the two leaved gates, and the gates shall not be shut.
I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight, I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron, and I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that I, the Lord, which call thee by thy name, am the God of Israel.
For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name, I have surname thee, though thou hast not known me.
I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God beside me, I girded thee, though thou hast not known me, that they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none beside me, I am the Lord, and there is none else, I formed the light, and created darkness, I make peace, and create evil.
I, the Lord, do all these things.
Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down righteousness, let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, and let righteousness spring up together.
I, the Lord, have created it, woe unto him that striveth with his maker, let the potsherd strive with the potsherd of the earth, shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, what makest thou, or thy work?
He hath no hands, woe unto him that saith unto his father, what begettest thou, or to the woman, what hast thou brought forth?
Thus saith the Lord, the holy one of Israel, and his maker, ask me of things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands, command ye me.
I have made the earth, and created man upon it, I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their hosts have I commanded.
I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his ways, he shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for price nor reward, saith the Lord of hosts.
Thus saith the Lord, the labor of Egypt, and merchandise of Ethiopia, and of the Sabians, men of stature, shall come over unto thee, and they shall be thine.
They shall come after thee in chains, they shall come over, and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make supplication unto thee, saying, Surely God is in thee.
And there is none else, there is no God. Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the Savior.
They shall be ashamed and also confounded, all of them. They shall go to confusion together that are makers of idols.
But Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation. Ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded, world without end.
For thus saith the Lord that created the heavens, God himself that formed the earth and made it, he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited.
I am the Lord, and there is none else. I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth. I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain.
I the Lord speak righteousness, I declare things that are right. Assemble yourselves and come, draw near together ye that are escaped of the nations.
They have no knowledge that set up the wood of their graven image and pray unto a God that cannot save. Tell ye and bring them near, yea, let them take counsel together who hath declared this from ancient time.
Who hath told it from that time? Have not I the Lord, and there is no God else beside me? A just God and a Savior, there is none beside me. Look unto me and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth.
For I am God, and there is none else. I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness and shall not return that unto me. Every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.
Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength. Even to him shall men come, and all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory.
Of the Book of Isaiah
46 Bell boweth down.
Nebo stoopeth.
Their idols were upon the beasts and upon the cattle.
Your carriages were heavy-loaden.
They are a burden to the weary beast.
They stoop, they bow down together.
They could not deliver the burden, but themselves are gone into captivity.
Harken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel,
which are borne by me from the belly, which are carried from the womb.
And even to your old age I am he, and even to whore hairs will I carry you.
I have made, and I will bear.
Even I will carry, and will deliver you.
To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me that we may be like?
They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance,
and hire a goldsmith, and he maketh it a god.
They fall down, yea, they worship.
They bear him upon the shoulder, they carry him, and set him in his place,
and he standeth.
From his place shall he not remove.
Yea, one shall cry unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him out of his trouble.
Remember this, and show yourselves men.
Bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors.
Remember the former things of old, for I am God, and there is none else.
I am God, and there is none like me.
Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done,
saying my council shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure.
Calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that executeth my council from a far country.
Yea, I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass.
I have purposed it, I will also do it.
Harken unto me, ye stout-hearted, that are far from righteousness.
I bring near my righteousness.
It shall not be far off, and my salvation shall not tarry,
and I will place salvation in Zion for Israel my glory.
Chapter 47
Come down and sit on the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon.
Sit on the ground.
There is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans,
for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate.
Take the millstones and grind meal.
Uncover thy locks, make bare the leg.
Uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers.
Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen.
I will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man.
As for our Redeemer, the Lord of hosts is his name, the Holy One of Israel.
Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans,
for thou shalt no more be called the Lady of kingdoms.
I was wroth with my people.
I have polluted mine inheritance and given them into thine hand.
Thou didst show them no mercy.
Upon the Ancient hast thou very heavily laid thy yoke.
And thou saidst, I shall be a Lady forever,
so that thou didst not lay these things to thy heart,
neither didst remember the latter end of it.
Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures,
that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine heart,
I am and none else beside me, I shall not sit as a widow,
neither shall I know the loss of children.
But these two things shall come to thee in a moment and one day,
the loss of children and widowhood.
They shall come upon thee in their perfection for the multitude of thy sorceries,
and for the great abundance of thine enchantments.
For thou hast trusted in thy wickedness, thou hast said, none seeth me.
Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee,
and thou hast said in thine heart, I am and none else beside me.
Therefore shall evil come upon thee.
Thou shalt not know from whence it riseth and mischief shall fall upon thee,
thou shalt not be able to put it off,
and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly which thou shalt not know.
Stand now, with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries,
wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth,
if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail.
Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels.
Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators,
stand up and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.
Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn them,
they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame,
there shall not be a cold to warm at, nor fire to sit before it.
Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured,
even thy merchants from thy youth,
they shall wander every one to his quarter, none shall save thee.
Chapter 48
Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel,
and are come forth out of the waters of Judah,
which swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel,
but not in truth nor in righteousness.
For they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel.
The Lord of hosts is his name.
I have declared the former things from the beginning,
and they went forth out of my mouth, and I showed them.
I did them suddenly, and they came to pass,
because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew,
and thy brow brass.
I have even from the beginning declared it to thee,
before it came to pass I showed it to thee,
lest thou shouldest say, mine idol hath done them,
and my graven image, and my molten image hath commanded them.
Thou hast heard, see all this, and will not ye declare it?
I have showed thee new things from this time,
even hidden things, and thou didst not know them.
They are created now, and not from the beginning,
even before the day when thou hurtest them not,
lest thou shouldest say, behold, I knew them.
Yea, thou hurtest not, yea, thy knewest not.
Yea, from that time thine ear was not opened,
for I knew that thou wouldest deal very treacherously,
and was called a transgressor from the womb.
For my name's sake will I defer mine anger,
and for my praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off.
Behold, I have refined thee, but not with silver.
I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.
For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it,
for how should my name be polluted,
and I will not give my glory unto another.
Harken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my called.
I am he, I am the first, I also am the last.
Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth,
and my right hand hath spanned the heavens.
When I call unto them, they stand up together.
All ye, assemble yourselves and hear,
which among them hath declared these things.
The Lord hath loved him, he will do his pleasure on Babylon,
and his arm shall be on the Chaldeans.
I, even I, have spoken, yea, I have called him.
I have brought him, and he shall make his way prosperous.
Come ye near unto me, hear ye this.
I have not spoken in secret from the beginning.
From the time that it was, there am I,
and now the Lord God and his Spirit hath sent me.
Thus saith the Lord thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.
I am the Lord thy God, which teacheth thee to profit,
which leadeth thee by the way that thou shouldest go.
O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments,
then had thy peace been as a river,
and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea.
Thy seed also had been as the sand,
and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof.
His name should not have been cut off nor destroyed from before me.
Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans,
with a voice of singing declare ye,
tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth.
Say ye, the Lord hath redeemed his servant Jacob,
and they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts.
He caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them.
He claved the rock also, and the waters gushed out.
There is no peace, saith the Lord unto the wicked.
He made my mouth like a sharp sword in the shadow of his hand, hath he hidden me? And made me a polished shaft in his quiver, hath he hidden me?
And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified.
Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain, yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God.
And now saith the Lord, that formed me from the womb, to be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him, though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength.
And he said, It is a light thing, that thou shouldest be my servant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel.
I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth.
Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to a servant of rulers, kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of the Lord that is faithful, and the Holy One of Israel, and he shall choose thee.
Thus saith the Lord, in an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee, and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause, to inherit the desolate heritages.
That thou mayest say to the prisoners, go forth, to them that are in darkness, show yourselves, they shall feed in the waves, and their pastors shall be in all high places, they shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor the sun smite them.
For he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them.
And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be exalted. Behold, these shall come from far and low, these from the north and from the west, and these from the land of synonym.
Sing, O heavens, and be joyful, O earth, and break forth into singing, O mountains, for the Lord hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted.
But Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb?
Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me, thy children shall make haste, thy destroyers and they that made thee waste shall go forth of thee.
Lift up thine eyes, round about, and behold, all these gather themselves together and come to thee. As I live, saith the Lord, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee as a bride doeth.
For thy waste and thy desolate places and the land of thy destruction shall even now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.
The children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the other, shall say again in thine ears, The place is too straight for me, give place to me, that I may dwell.
Then shalt thou say in thine heart, Who have begotten me? These, seeing I have lost my children and am desolate, a captive and removing to and fro, and who have brought up these? Behold, I was left alone, these, where had they been?
Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders, and kings shall be thy nursing fathers and their queens thy nursing mothers.
They shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet, and thou shalt know that I am the Lord. For they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.
Shall the prey be taken from the mighty or the lawful captive delivered? But thus saith the Lord, Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered.
For I will contend with them that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children, and I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh, and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine.
And all flesh shall know that I, the Lord, am thy Savior, and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.
Chapter 50. Thus saith the Lord, Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, whom I have put away? Or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you?
Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away. Wherefore, when I came, was there no man? When I called, was there none to answer?
Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? Or have I no power to deliver? Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make the rivers in wilderness, their fish stinketh, because there is no water and dieth for thirst.
I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering. The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary.
He waketh morning by morning, he waketh mine ear to hear as the learned. The Lord God hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back.
I gave my back to the smiters and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair. I hid not my face from shame and spitting. For the Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded. Therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed.
He is near that justifieth me. Who will contend with me? Let us stand together. Who is my adversary? Let him come near to me. Behold, the Lord God will help me. Who is he that shall condemn me? Lo, they all shall wax old as a garment, the moth shall eat them up.
Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness and hath no light? Let him trust in the name of the Lord and stay upon his God.
Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand. Ye shall lie down in sorrow.
Harken unto me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the Lord. Look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged.
Look unto Abraham, your father, and unto Sarah that bare you. For I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him. For the Lord shall comfort Zion.
He will comfort all her waste places, and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord. Joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody.
Harken unto me, my people, and give ear unto me, O my nation, for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a light of the people.
My righteousness is near, my salvation is gone forth, and mine arms shall judge the people. The isles shall wait upon me, and on mine arms shall they trust.
Lift up your eyes to the heavens and look upon the earth beneath, for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner.
But my salvation shall be forever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished.
Harken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law. Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.
For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool. But my righteousness shall be forever, and my salvation from generation to generation.
Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord, awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations of old. Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab and wounded the dragon? Art thou not it which hath dried the sea, the waters of the great deep, that have made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass over?
Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Zion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their head. They shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.
I, even I, am he that comforteth you. Who art thou that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the Son of Man which shall be made as grass?
And forgettest the Lord thy Maker that has stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth, and has feared continually every day because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? And where is the fury of the oppressor?
The captive exiled hasteneth that he may be loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread shall fail.
But I am the Lord thy God that divided the sea, whose waves roared. The Lord of hosts is his name. And I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, thou art my people.
Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury. Thou hast drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out.
There is none to guide her among all the sons whom she hath brought forth. Neither is there any that taketh her by the hand of all the sons that she hath brought up.
These two things come unto thee. Who shall be sorry for thee, desolation and destruction, and the famine and the sword? By whom shall I comfort thee?
Thy sons have fainted. They lie at the head of all the streets as a wild bull in a net. They are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God.
Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted and drunken, but not with wine. Thus saith thy Lord the Lord, and thy God, that pleadeth the cause of his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling.
Even the dregs of the cup of my fury, thou shalt no more drink it again. But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee, which have said to thy soul, bow down, that we may go over, and thou hast laid thy body as the ground and as the street to them that went over.
This was the story of Isaiah 51
52. Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion, put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem,
for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean. Shake
thyself from the dust, arise and sit down, O Jerusalem, loose thyself from the bands of
thy knack, O captive daughter of Zion. For thus saith the Lord, ye have sold yourselves for not,
and ye shall be redeemed without money. For thus saith the Lord God, My people went down a four
time into Egypt to sojourn there, and the Assyrian oppressed them without cause. Now therefore what
have I here, saith the Lord, that My people is taken away for not? They that rule over them
make them to howl, saith the Lord, and My name continually every day is blasphemed. Therefore
My people shall know My name, therefore they shall know in that day that I am He that doth
speak, behold it is I. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of Him that bringeth good
tidings, that publisheth peace, that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation,
that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth. Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice, with the voice
together shall they sing, for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord shall bring again Zion.
Break forth into joy, sing together ye waste places of Jerusalem, for the Lord hath comforted
His people, He hath redeemed Jerusalem. The Lord hath made bare His holy arm in the eyes of all
the nations, and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God. Depart ye, depart ye,
go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing, go ye out of the midst of her, be ye clean,
that bear the vessels of the Lord. For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight, for the
Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel will be your reward. Behold, My servant shall deal
prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled and be very high. As many were astonied at thee,
His visage was so marred more than any man, and His form more than the sons of men. So shall
He sprinkle many nations, the kings shall shut their mouths at Him, for that which had not been
told them shall they see, and that which they had not heard shall they consider.
Chapter 53 Who hath believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? For
He shall grow up before Him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground. He hath no
form nor comeliness, and when we shall see Him there is no beauty that we should desire Him.
He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, and we hid,
as it were, our faces from Him. He was despised and we esteemed Him not. Surely He hath borne our
griefs and carried our sorrows, yet we did esteem Him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted.
But He was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement
of our peace was upon Him, and with His stripes we are healed. All we, like sheep, have gone astray,
we have turned every one to His own way, and the Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all.
He was oppressed, and He was afflicted, yet He opened not His mouth. He is brought as a lamb
to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so He openeth not His mouth.
He was taken from prison and from judgment, and who shall declare His generation? For He was cut
off out of the land of the living, for the transgression of My people was He stricken.
And He made His grave with the wicked and with the rich in His death, because He had done no
violence, neither was any deceit in His mouth. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise Him, He hath put
Him to grief. When Thou shalt make His soul an offering for sin, He shall see His seed,
He shall prolong His days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in His hand. He shall see
the travail of His soul, and shall be satisfied. By His knowledge shall My righteous servant
justify many, for He shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I divide Him a portion with the
great, and He shall divide the spoil with the strong, because He hath poured out His soul unto
death, and He was numbered with the transgressors, and He bare the sin of many and made intercession
for the transgressors. Chapter 54 Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear, break forth into singing
and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child. For more are the children of the desolate
than the children of the married wife, saith the Lord. Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them
stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations. Spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy
stakes. For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left, and thy seed shall inherit
the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited. Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed,
neither be thou confounded, for thou shalt not be put to shame, for thou shalt forget the shame
of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more. For thy Maker is thine
husband, the Lord of hosts is His name, and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, the God of the
earth shall He be called. For the Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit,
and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God. For a small moment have I forsaken thee,
but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment,
but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer.
For this is as the waters of Noah unto me, for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah
should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee,
nor rebuke thee. For the mountains shall depart and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall
not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath
mercy on thee. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will lay
thy stones with fair colors and lay thy foundations with sapphires, and I will make thy windows of
agates and thy gates of carbuncles and all thy borders of pleasant stones, and all thy children
shall be taught of the Lord and great shall be the peace of thy children. In righteousness
shalt thou be established, thou shalt be far from oppression, for thou shalt not fear,
and from terror, for it shall not come near thee. Behold, they shall surely gather together,
but not by me, whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake.
Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire and that bringeth forth an
instrument for his work, and I have created the waster to destroy. No weapon that is formed
against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment,
thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord,
and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord.
For that which is not bread, and your labor for that which satisfieth not. Harken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness.
Incline your ear, and come unto me. Here, and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David.
Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader, and a commander to the people. Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee, because of the Lord thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel, for he hath glorified thee.
Seek ye the Lord, while he may be found. Call ye upon him, while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him.
And to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways, my ways saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.
For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater.
So shall my word be, that goeth forth out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.
For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace. The mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.
Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the briar shall come up the myrtle tree. And it shall be to the Lord for a name, for an everlasting sign, that shall not be cut off.
Chapter 56 Thus saith the Lord, Keep ye judgment, and do justice, for my salvation is near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed.
Blessed is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that layeth hold on it, that keepeth the Sabbath from polluting it, and keepeth his hand from doing any evil.
Neither let the son of the stranger that have joined himself to the Lord speak, saying, The Lord hath utterly separated me from his people. Neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree.
For thus saith the Lord unto the eunuchs that keep my Sabbath, and choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant. Even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls a place and a name, better than of sons and of daughters.
Yea, all ye beasts in the forest, his watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.
Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand, they all look to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarter.
Come ye, say, they I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink, and tomorrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.
Chapter 57. The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth to heart, and merciful men are taken away, none, considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness. But draw near hither ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the whore, against whom do ye sport yourselves, against whom make ye a wide mouth and draw out the tongue.
Are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood, inflaming yourselves with idols, under every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys, under the cliffs of the rocks?
Among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion, they, they are thy lot, even to them hast thou poured a drink offering, thou hast offered a meat offering, should I receive comfort in these?
Upon a lofty high mountain hast thou set thy bed, even thither wentest thou up to offer sacrifice. Behold, the doors also and the posts hast thou set up thy remembrance, for thou hast discovered thyself to another than me, and art gone up.
Thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made thee a covenant with them, thou lovest their bed where thou sawest it, and thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst send thy messengers far off, and didst debase thyself even unto hell.
Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way, yet, saidest thou not, there is no hope, thou hast found the life of thine hand, therefore thou wast not grieved.
And of whom hast thou been afraid or feared that thou hast lied, and hast not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart? Have not I held my peace, even of old, and thou fearest me not? I will declare thy righteousness and thy works, for they shall not profit thee.
And when thou cryest, let thy companies deliver thee, but the wind shall carry them all away, vanity shall take them, but he that putteth his trust in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my holy mountain.
And shall say, Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling-back out of the way of my people.
For thus saith the High and Lofty One, that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place with him. Also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.
For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth, for the spirit shall fail before me, and the souls which I have made.
For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him. I hid me and was wroth, and he went on forwardly in the way of his heart. I have seen his way and will heal him. I will lead him also and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners I create the fruit of the lips.
Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, saith the Lord, and I will heal him. But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, saith my God to the wicked.
Chapter 58 Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice
like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob, their sins. Yet they
seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook
not the ordinance of their God. They ask of me the ordinances of justice, they take delight
in approaching to God. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? Wherefore have
we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your fast,
ye find pleasure, and exact all your labours. Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and
to smite with the fist of wickedness. Ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice
to be heard on high. Is it such a fast that I have chosen, a day for a man to afflict
his soul? Is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes
under him? Wilt thou call this a fast and an acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this
the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens,
and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy
bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house, when thou seest
an acre that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh? Then shall thy
light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily, and thy righteousness
shall go before thee. The glory of the Lord shall be thy rear reward. Then shall thou call and the
Lord shall answer. Thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here I am. If thou take away from the midst
of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity, and if thou draw out thy soul
to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy
darkness be as the noonday, and the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in
drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water
whose waters fail not, and they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places.
Thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations, and thou shalt be called the
repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwelling. If thou turn away thy foot from the
Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath the delight, the holy of the
Lord, honorable, and shalt honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure,
nor speaking thine own words, then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord, and I will cause
thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father,
for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. Chapter 59 Behold, the Lord's hand is not
shortened, that it cannot save, neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear. But your iniquities
have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you,
that he will not hear. For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity.
Your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered perverseness. None calleth for justice,
nor any pleadeth for truth. They trust in vanity, and speak lies. They conceive mischief,
and bring forth iniquity. They hatch cockatrice eggs, and weave the spider's web. He that eateth
their eggs dieth, and that which is crushed breaketh out into a viper. Their webs shall
not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their works. Their works are
works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands. Their feet run to evil,
and they make haste to shed innocent blood. Their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity.
Wasting and destruction are in their paths. The way of peace they know not, and there is no
judgment in their goings. They have made them crooked paths. Whosoever goeth therein shall not
know peace. Therefore is judgment far from us. Neither doth justice overtake us. We wait for
light, but behold obscurity, for brightness, but we walk in darkness. We grope for the wall
like the blind, and we grope as if we had no eyes. We stumble at noonday as in the night.
We are in desolate places as dead men. We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves.
We look for judgment, but there is none, for salvation, but it is far off from us.
For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins testify against us. For our
transgressions are with us, and as for our iniquities we know them, in transgressing and
lying against the Lord, and departing away from our God. Speaking oppression and revolt,
conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood. And judgment is turned away backward,
and justice standeth afar off. For truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter.
Yea, truth faileth, and he that departeth from evil maketh himself a prey. And the Lord saw it,
and it displeased him that there was no judgment. And he saw that there was no man, and wondered
that there was no intercessor. Therefore his arm brought salvation unto him, and his righteousness
it sustained him. For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and a helmet of salvation upon his
head. And he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloak.
According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay. Fury to his adversaries, recompense to
his enemies. To the islands he will repay recompense. So shall they fear the name of the
Lord from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun. When the enemy shall come in like a
flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him. And the Redeemer shall
come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord.
As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord. My Spirit that is upon thee,
and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.
Chapter 60 Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.
For behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people, but the Lord shall
arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light,
and kings to the brightness of thy rising. Lift up thine eyes round about and see,
all they gather themselves together, they come to thee. Thy sons shall come from far, and thy
daughters shall be nursed at thy side. Then thou shalt see and flow together, and thine heart shall
fear and be enlarged. Because the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee,
the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee. The multitude of camels shall cover thee,
the dromedaries of Midian and Ephar, all they from Sheba shall come. They shall bring gold and
incense, and they shall show forth the praises of the Lord. All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered
together unto thee, the rams of Nebeoth shall minister unto thee. They shall come up with
acceptance on mine altar, and I will glorify the house of my glory. Who are these that fly as a
cloud, and as the doves to their windows? Surely the Isles shall wait for me, and the ships of
Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, unto the name of
the Lord thy God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because he hath glorified thee. And the sons of
strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee. For in my wrath
I smote thee, but in my favor have I had mercy on thee. Therefore thy gates shall be open
continually. They shall not be shut day nor night, that men may bring unto thee the forces of the
Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought. For the nation and kingdom that will not serve
thee shall perish, yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted. The glory of Lebanon shall
come unto thee, the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of my
sanctuary, and I will make the place of my feet glorious. The sons also of them that afflicted
thee shall come bending unto thee, and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at
the soles of thy feet, and they shall call thee the city of the Lord, the Zion of the Holy One of
Israel. Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee
an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations. Thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles,
and shalt suck the breast of kings, and thou shalt know that I the Lord, and thy Savior,
and thy Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob. For brass I will bring gold, and for iron
I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron. I will also make thy officers
peace, and thine exactors righteousness. Violence shall no more be heard in thy land,
wasting nor destruction within thy borders, but thou shalt call thy walls salvation,
and thy gates praise. The sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness
shall the moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light,
and thy God thy glory. Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon withdraw itself,
for the Lord shall be thy everlasting light, and the days of thy morning shall be ended.
Thy people also shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the land forever, the branch of
my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. A little one shall become a thousand,
and a small one a strong nation. I the Lord will hasten it in his time.
you
CHAPTER 61.
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good
tidings unto the meek. He hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty
to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable
year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn, to
appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy
for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, that they might be called
trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. And they
shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former desolations, and they shall
repair the waste cities, the desolations of many generations. And strangers shall stand
and feed your flocks, and the sons of the alien shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers.
But ye shall be named the priests of the Lord, men shall call you the ministers of our God,
ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall ye boast yourselves.
For your shame ye shall have double, and for confusion they shall rejoice in their portion,
therefore in their land they shall possess the double, everlasting joy shall be unto them.
For I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt offering, and I will direct their work in
truth, and I will make an everlasting covenant with them. And their seed shall be known among
the Gentiles, and their offspring among the people. All that see them shall acknowledge them,
that they are the seed which the Lord hath blessed. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord,
my soul shall be joyful in my God, for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation,
he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness, and as a bridegroom decketh himself with
ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels. For as the earth bringeth forth her
bud, and as the garden causeth the things that are sown in it to spring forth, so the Lord God
will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the nations.
Chapter 62 For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest,
until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp
And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory, and thou shalt be
called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name. Thou shalt also be a crown of
glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God. Thou shalt no more be
termed forsaken, neither shall thy land any more be termed desolate. But thou shalt be called
Hepsava, and thy land Beulah, for the Lord delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be married. For as a
young man marryeth a virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee, and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over
the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem,
which shall never hold their peace day nor night. Ye that make mention of the Lord keep not silence,
and give him no rest till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.
The Lord hath sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength, surely I will no more give
thy corn to be meat for thine enemies, and the sons of the stranger shall not drink thy wine,
for which thou hast laboured. But they that have gathered it shall eat it, and praise the Lord,
and they that have brought it together shall drink it in the courts of my holiness.
Go through, go through the gates, prepare ye the way of the people. Cast up, cast up the highway,
gather out the stones, lift up a standard for the people. Behold, the Lord hath proclaimed unto the
end of the world, say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh. Behold,
his reward is with him, and his work before him. And they shall call them the holy people,
the redeemed of the Lord, and thou shalt be called sought out, a city not forsaken.
Chapter 63 Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bosra? This that is
glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength, I that speak in
righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him
that treadeth in the wine-fat? I have trodden the wine-press alone, and of the people there
was none with me. For I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury, and their
blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments. And I will stain all my reinment, for the day of
his coming. And I looked, and there was none to help, and I wondered that there was none to uphold.
Therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me, and my fury it upheld me.
And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I will bring
their strength down to the earth. I will mention the loving kindness of the Lord,
and the praises of the Lord according to all that the Lord hath bestowed on us,
and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he hath bestowed on them according to his
mercies, and according to the multitude of his loving kindness. For he said, surely they are
my people, children that will not lie. So he was their Saviour. In all their affliction
he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them. In his love and in his pity he redeemed
them, and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old. But they rebelled, and vexed his
enemy, and he fought against them. Then he remembered the days of old, Moses and his people,
saying, Where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherd of his flock?
Where is he that put his Holy Spirit within him, that led them by the right hand of Moses
with his glorious arm, dividing the water before them, to make himself an everlasting name?
That led them through the deep, as an horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble.
As the beast goeth down into the valley, the Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest. So didst
thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name. Look down from heaven, and behold from the
sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward me. Are they restrained? Doubtless thou art our
Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledges not, thou, O Lord, art our
Father, our Redeemer, thy name is from everlasting. O Lord, why hast thou made us to err from thy ways,
and harden our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servant's sake, the tribes of thine inheritance.
The people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while. Our adversaries have trodden down
thy sanctuary. We are thine. Thou never bearest rule over them. They were not called by thy name.
Michael Packard
64. O, that thou wouldst rend the heavens, that thou wouldst come down, that the mountains
might flow down at thy presence, as when the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the
waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble
at thy presence. When thou didst terrible things, which we looked not for, thou camest
down, the mountains flowed down at thy presence. For since the beginning of the world men have
not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, O God, beside thee, what he hath
prepared for him that waiteth for him. Thou meetest him that rejoiceth, and worketh righteousness,
those that remember thee in thy ways. Behold, thou art wroth, for we have sinned in those in
and we shall be saved. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness are
as filthy rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.
And there is none that calleth upon thy name, that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee,
for thou hast hid thy face from us, and hast consumed us, because of our iniquities. But now,
O Lord, thou art our Father, we are the clay, and thou our potter, and we all are the work of thy
hand. Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity forever. Behold, see, we
are thy people, thy holy cities are a wilderness, Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation.
Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised thee, is burned up with fire,
and all our pleasant things are laid waste. Wilt thou refrain thyself for these things,
O Lord? Wilt thou hold thy peace and afflict us very sore?
Chapter 65. I am sought of them that ask not for me. I am found of them that sought me not.
I said, Behold me, behold me unto a nation that was not called by my name. I have spread out my
hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walketh in a way that was not good after
their own thoughts. A people that provoketh me to anger continually to my face, that sacrificeth
in gardens, and burneth incense upon altars of brick, which remain among the graves, and lodge
in the monuments, which eat swine's flesh, and broth of abominable things is in their vessels,
which say, Stand by thyself, come not near to me, for I am holier than thou. These are a smoke in
my nose, a fire that burneth all the day. Behold, it is written before me, I will not keep silence,
but will recompense, even recompense into their bosom, your iniquities, and the iniquities of
your fathers together, saith the Lord, which have burned incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed
me upon the hills. Therefore will I measure their former work into their bosom, thus saith the Lord,
as the new wine is found in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not, for a blessing is in it.
So will I do for my servant's sake, that I may not destroy them all. And I will bring forth a
seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah, an inheritor of my mountains, and mine elect shall inherit it,
and my servant shall dwell there. And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Acre,
a place for the herds to lie down in, for my people that have sought me. But ye are they that
forsake the Lord, that forget my holy mountain, that prepare a table for that troop, and that
furnish the drink offering unto that number. Therefore will I number you to the sword, and
ye shall all bow down to the slaughter. Because when I called, ye did not answer. When I spake,
ye did not hear, but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted not.
Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry.
Behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty. Behold, my servants shall rejoice,
but ye shall be ashamed. Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow
of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit. And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my
chosen, for the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name. That he who
blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in the God of truth, and he that sweareth in the
earth shall swear by the God of truth, because the former troubles are forgotten, and because
they are hid from mine eyes. For behold, I create new heavens and a new earth, and the former shall
not be remembered, nor come into mind. But be ye glad and rejoice forever in that which I create.
For behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy, and I will rejoice in Jerusalem,
and joy in my people. And the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of
crying. There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his
days. For the child shall die and hundred years old, but the sinner being and hundred years old
shall be accursed. And they shall build their houses and inhabit them, and they shall plant
vineyards and eat the fruit of them. They shall not build and another inhabit, they shall not plant
and another eat. For as the days of a tree are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy
the work of their hands. They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for trouble. For they are
the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them. And it shall come to pass,
that before they call I will answer, and while they are yet speaking I will hear. The wolf and
shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock, and dust shall be the serpent's
meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountains, saith the Lord. Chapter 66
Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool. Where is the
place of my rest? For all those things hath mine hand made, and all those things have been, saith
the Lord. But to this man I will look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit,
and trembleth at my word. He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man. He that sacrificeth a lamb
is as if he cut off a dog's neck. He that offereth an oblation is as if he offered swine's blood.
He that burneth incense is as if he blessed an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways,
and their soul delighteth in their abominations. I also will choose their delusions,
and will bring their fears upon them, because when I called none did answer. When I spake
they did not hear, but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not.
Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word, your brethren that hated you, that cast you
out for my name's sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified. But he shall appear to your joy,
and they shall be ashamed. A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple,
a voice of the Lord that rendereth recompense to his enemies. Before she travailed, she brought
forth, before her pain came she was delivered of a man-child. Who hath heard such a thing?
Who hath seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day,
or shall a nation be born at once? For as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children.
Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth, saith the Lord? Shall I cause to bring
and shut the womb, saith thy God? Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her.
All ye that love her, rejoice for joy with her. All ye that mourn for her,
that ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations,
that ye may milk out and be delighted with the abundance of her glory.
For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river,
and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream. Then shall ye suck, ye shall be born upon
her sides, and be dandled upon her knees. As one whom his mother comforteth, so I will comfort you,
and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice,
and your bones shall flourish like an herb, and the hand of the Lord shall be known
toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies. For behold, the Lord will come with
fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke
with flames of fire. For by fire and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh,
and the slain of the Lord shall be many. They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves
in the gardens behind one tree in the midst, eating swine's flesh, and the abomination,
and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the Lord. For I know their works,
and their thoughts. It shall come that I will gather all nations in tongues,
and they shall come and see my glory. And I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that
escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pole, and Ludd, that draw the bow, to Tubal,
and Javin, to the Isles afar off, that they have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory,
and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles. And they shall bring all your brethren
for an offering unto the Lord, out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters,
and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the Lord.
As the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel, into the house of the Lord.
And I will also take them for priests, and for Levites, saith the Lord. For as the new heavens,
and the new worth which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the Lord,
so shall your seed and your name remain, and it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to
another, and from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith the Lord.
And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcasses of the men that have transgressed
against me, for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched,
and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.